Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Ataturk)

Jump to navigation
Jump to search
"Atatürk" redirects here. For other uses, see Atatürk (disambiguation).
For other people named Mustafa Kamal, see Mustafa Kamal (disambiguation).
His Excellency 
Ghazi
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk

Atatürk during the 1930s

1st President of Turkey
In office
29 October 1923 – 10 November 1938
Prime Minister
Ismet Inönü
Ali Fethi Okyar
Celâl Bayar
Preceded by
Office established
Succeeded by
Ismet Inönü
1st Prime Minister of the Government of the Grand National Assembly
In office
3 May 1920 – 24 January 1921
Deputy
Fevzi Çakmak
Preceded by
Office established
Succeeded by
Fevzi Çakmak
1st Speaker of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey
In office
24 April 1920 – 29 October 1923
Preceded by
Office established
Succeeded by
Ali Fethi Okyar
1st Leader of the Republican People's Party
In office
9 September 1923 – 10 November 1938
Preceded by
Office established
Succeeded by
Ismet Inönü
Personal details
Born
Ali Riza oglu Mustafa
(Mustafa son of Ali Riza)
19 May 1881 (conventional)
Salonica, Salonica Vilayet, Ottoman Empire 
(now Thessaloniki, Greece)
Died
10 November 1938 (aged 57)
Dolmabahçe Palace, Istanbul, Turkey
Resting place
Ethnography Museum, Ankara (21 November 1938 – 10 November 1953)
Anitkabir, Ankara (from 10 November 1953)
Nationality
Turkish
Political party
Republican People's Party
Other political
affiliations
Motherland and Liberty
Committee of Union and Progress
Association for the Defense of the Rights of Anatolia and Rumelia (Republican People's Party after 1923)
Spouse(s)
Lâtife Usakligil (1923–25)
Awards
List (24 medals)
Signature

Military service
Allegiance
 Ottoman Empire (1893–1919)
 Turkey (1921–1927)
Service/branch
 Ottoman Army
 Turkish Army
Rank
Marshal
Commands
19th Division
16th Corps
2nd Army
7th Army
Yildirim Army Group
Army of the Grand National Assembly
Battles/wars
List
[show]

Graphical timeline
Detailed chronology

This article is part of 
a series about
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
Personal lifeBirth dateNameEarly lifeFamilyReligious beliefsWillPublications

Military career
TobrukAnzac CoveChunuk BairScimitar HillSari BairBitlisSakaryaGreat Offensive

Goals 
GoalsPoliticalSocialLegalEducationalEconomicAnalysis

Kemalism 
PhilosophyRepublicanismPopulismLaicismReformismNationalismStatismAnalysis

Also
State funeralCentennialTimelineCult of personality

 
Gallery: Picture, Sound, Video
vte
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (Turkish: [musta'fa ce'mal a'ta?ty?c]; 19 May 1881 (conventional) – 10 November 1938) was a Turkish army officer, revolutionary, and founder of the Republic of Turkey, serving as its first President from 1923 until his death in 1938. Ideologically a secularist and nationalist, his policies and theories became known as Kemalism. 
Atatürk came to prominence for his role in securing the Ottoman Turkish victory at the Battle of Gallipoli (1915) during World War I.[1] Following the Empire's defeat and subsequent dissolution, he led the Turkish National Movement, which resisted the mainland Turkey's partition among the victorious Allied powers. Establishing a provisional government in the present-day Turkish capital Ankara, he defeated the forces sent by the Allies, thus emerging victorious from what was later referred to as the Turkish War of Independence. He subsequently proceeded to abolish the decrepit Ottoman Empire and proclaimed the foundation of the Turkish Republic in its place. 
As the president of the newly formed Turkish Republic, Atatürk initiated a rigorous program of political, economic, and cultural reforms with the ultimate aim of building a modern, progressive, and secular nation-state. He made primary education free and compulsory, opening thousands of new schools all over the country. He also introduced the Latin-based Turkish alphabet, replacing the old Ottoman Turkish alphabet. Turkish women received equal civil and political rights during Atatürk's presidency ahead of many Western countries.[2] In particular, women were given voting rights in local elections by Act no. 1580 on 3 April 1930 and a few years later, in 1934, full universal suffrage, earlier than most other countries in the world.[3] 
His government carried out a policy of Turkicisation trying to create a homogeneous and unified nation.[4][5][6] Under Atatürk, non-Turkish minorities were pressured to speak Turkish in public,[7] non-Turkish toponyms and last names of minorities had to be changed to Turkish renditions.[8][9] The Turkish Parliament granted him the surname Atatürk in 1934, which means "Father of the Turks", in recognition of the role he played in building the modern Turkish Republic.[10] He died on 10 November 1938 at the age of 57 in Dolmabahçe Palace;[11] he was succeeded as President by his long-time Prime Minister Ismet Inönü[12] and was honored with a state funeral. In 1953, his iconic mausoleum was built and opened, which is surrounded by a park called the Peace Park in honor of his famous expression "Peace at Home, Peace in the World". 
In 1981, the centennial of Atatürk's birth, his memory was honoured by the UN and UNESCO, which declared it The Atatürk Year in the World and adopted the Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial, describing him as "the leader of the first struggle given against colonialism and imperialism" and a "remarkable promoter of the sense of understanding between peoples and durable peace between the nations of the world and that he worked all his life for the development of harmony and cooperation between peoples without distinction".[13][14] Atatürk is commemorated by many memorials throughout Turkey and numerous countries all over the world, where place names are named in honor of him. Eleftherios Venizelos, former Prime Minister of Greece, forwarded Atatürk's name for the 1934 Nobel Peace Prize.[15] 

Contents
1
Early life
2
Military career
2.1
Early years
2.2
Italo-Turkish War (1911–12)
2.3
Balkan Wars (1912–13)
2.4
First World War (1914–18)
2.5
Turkish War of Independence (1919–1923)
3
Establishment of the Republic of Turkey
4
Presidency
4.1
Domestic policies
4.1.1
Emergence of the state, 1923–1924
4.1.2
Civic independence and the Caliphate, 1924–1925
4.1.3
Opposition to Mustafa Kemal in 1924–1927
4.1.4
Modernization efforts, 1926–1930
4.1.5
Opposition to Mustafa Kemal in 1930–1931
4.1.6
Modernization efforts, 1931–1938
4.1.7
Unification and nationalisation efforts
4.2
Foreign policies
4.2.1
Issue of Mosul
4.2.2
Relations with the Russian SFSR/Soviet Union
4.2.3
Turkish-Greek alliance
4.2.4
Neighbours to the east
4.2.5
Turkish Straits
4.2.6
Balkan Pact
4.2.7
Issue of Hatay
4.3
Economic policies
4.3.1
State intervention, 1923–1929
4.3.2
Great Depression, 1929–1931
4.3.3
Liberalization and planned growth, 1931–1939
5
Personal life
6
Illness and death
7
Legacy
7.1
Turkey
7.2
Worldwide
8
Awards and decorations
8.1
Ottoman Empire and Republic of Turkey
8.2
Foreign honours
9
See also
10
Notes
11
References
12
External links
Early life
Further information: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's personal life
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was born (under the name Ali Riza oglu Mustafa) in the early months of 1881, either in the Ahmet Subasi neighbourhood or at a house (preserved as a museum) in Islahhane Street (now Apostolou Pavlou Street) in the Koca Kasim Pasha neighbourhood in Salonica (Selanik),[16] Ottoman Empire (Thessaloniki in present-day Greece), to Ali Riza Efendi, a militia officer, title-deed clerk and lumber trader, and Zübeyde Hanim. Only one of Mustafa's siblings, a sister named Makbule (Atadan) survived childhood; she died in 1956.[17] According to Andrew Mango, his family was Muslim, Turkish-speaking and precariously middle-class.[18] His father Ali Riza is thought to have been of Albanian origin by some authors;[19][20][21] however, according to Falih Rifki Atay, Vamik D. Volkan, Norman Itzkowitz, Müjgân Cunbur, Numan Kartal and Hasan Izzettin Dinamo, Ali Riza's ancestors were Turks, ultimately descending from Söke in the Aydin Province of Anatolia.[22][23][24][25][26][27] His mother Zübeyde is thought to have been of Turkish origin[20][21] and according to Sevket Süreyya Aydemir, she was of Yörük ancestry.[28] 
 

Mustafa Kemal with his mother Zübeyde Hanim (middle) and sister Makbule Atadan (left)
He was born Mustafa, and his second name Kemal (meaning Perfection or Maturity) was given to him by his mathematics teacher, Captain Üsküplü Mustafa Efendi, "in admiration of his capability and maturity" according to Afet Inan,[29][30] and, according to Ali Fuat Cebesoy, because his teacher wanted to distinguish his student who had the same name as him,[31] although his biographer Andrew Mango suggests that he may have chosen the name himself as a tribute to the nationalist poet Namik Kemal.[32] In his early years, his mother encouraged Mustafa Kemal to attend a religious school, something he did reluctantly and only briefly. Later, he attended the Semsi Efendi School (a private school with a more secular curriculum) at the direction of his father. His parents wanted him to learn a trade, but without consulting them, Mustafa Kemal took the entrance exam for the Salonica Military School (Selanik Askeri Rüstiyesi) in 1893. In 1896, he enrolled into the Monastir Military High School. On 14 March 1899,[33] he enrolled at the Ottoman Military Academy in the neighbourhood of Pangalti[34] within the Sisli district of the Ottoman capital city Constantinople (now Istanbul) and graduated in 1902. He later graduated from the Ottoman Military College in Constantinople on 11 January 1905.[33] 
Military career
Main article: Military career of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
Early years
See also: Vatan ve Hürriyet, Committee of Union and Progress, and Young Turk Revolution
 

The house where Atatürk was born in the Ottoman city of Selanik (Thessaloniki in present-day Greece)
 

The reconstructed house of Atatürk's paternal grandparents, in the Ottoman village of Kocacik (Kodžadžik in present-day Macedonia)
Shortly after graduation, he was arrested by the police for his anti monarchist activities. Following a confinement of several months he was released only with the support of Riza Pasha, his former school director.[35] After his release, Mustafa Kemal was assigned to the Fifth Army based in Damascus as a Staff Captain[33] in the company of Ali Fuat (Cebesoy) and Lütfi Müfit (Özdes).[36] He joined a small secret revolutionary society of reformist officers led by a merchant Mustafa Elvan (Cantekin) called Vatan ve Hürriyet ("Motherland and Liberty"). On 20 June 1907, he was promoted to the rank of Senior Captain (Kolagasi) and on 13 October 1907, assigned to the headquarters of the Third Army in Manastir.[37] He joined the Committee of Union and Progress, with membership number 322, although in later years he became known for his opposition to, and frequent criticism of, the policies pursued by the CUP leadership. On 22 June 1908, he was appointed the Inspector of the Ottoman Railways in Eastern Rumelia (Dogu Rumeli Bölgesi Demiryollari Müfettisi).[37] In July 1908, he played a role in the Young Turk Revolution which seized power from Sultan Abdülhamid II and restored the constitutional monarchy. 
 

Mustafa Kemal Bey (4th from right) listening to the briefing of French Colonel Auguste Edouard Hirschauer during the Picardie army manoeuvres, September 1910
He was proposing depolitization in the army, a proposal which was disliked by the leaders of the CUP. As a result, he was sent away to Tripolitania Vilayet (present Libya, then an Ottoman territory) under the pretext of suppressing a tribal rebellion towards the end of 1908.[35] According to Mikush however, he volunteered for this mission.[38] He suppressed the revolt and returned to Istanbul in January 1909. 
In April 1909 in Istanbul, a group of soldiers began a counter revolution (see 31 March Incident). Mustafa Kemal was instrumental in suppressing the revolt.[39] 
In 1910 he was called to the Ottoman provinces in Albania.[40][41] At that time Isa Boletini was leading Albanian uprisings in Kosovo and there were revolts in Albania.[42][43] In 1910 he met with Eqerem Vlora the Albanian lord, politician, writer, and one of the signatories of Albanian Declaration of Independence.[44][45] 
Later, in the autumn of 1910, he was among the Ottoman military observers who attended the Picardie army manoeuvres in France,[46] and in 1911, served at the Ministry of War (Harbiye Nezareti) in Istanbul for a short time. 
Italo-Turkish War (1911–12)
Main article: Italo-Turkish War
See also: Battle of Tobruk (1911)
 

Binbasi Mustafa Kemal Bey (left) with an Ottoman military officer and Bedouin forces in Derna, Tripolitania Vilayet, 1912
In 1911, he was assigned to the Ottoman Tripolitania Vilayet (present-day Libya) to fight in the Italo-Turkish War, mainly in the areas near Benghazi, Derna and Tobruk against a 150,000-strong Italian amphibious assault force,[47] which had to be countered by 20,000 Bedouins[48] and 8,000 Turks[48] A short time before Italy declared war, a large portion of the Ottoman troops in Libya were sent to the Ottoman province of Yemen in order to put down the rebellion there, so the Ottoman government was caught with inadequate resources to counter the Italians in Libya; and the British government, which controlled the Ottoman provinces of Egypt and Sudan, did not allow sending additional Ottoman troops to Libya through Egypt. Ottoman soldiers like Mustafa Kemal went to Libya either dressed as Arabs (risking imprisonment if noticed by the British authorities in Egypt), or through very few available ferries (the Italians, who had superior naval forces, effectively controlled the sea routes to Tripoli). However, despite all the hardships, Mustafa Kemal's forces in Libya managed to repel the Italians on a number of occasions, such as the Battle of Tobruk on 22 December 1911. During the Battle of Derna on 16–17 January 1912, while Mustafa Kemal was assaulting the Italian-controlled fortress of Kasr-i Harun, two Italian planes dropped bombs on the Ottoman forces and a piece of limestone from a damaged building's rubble entered Mustafa Kemal's left eye; which caused a permanent damage on his left eye's tissue, but not total loss of sight. He received medical treatment for nearly a month; he attempted to leave the Red Crescent's health facilities after only two weeks, but when his eye's situation worsened, he had to return and resume treatment. On 6 March 1912 Mustafa Kemal became the Commander of the Ottoman forces in Derna. He managed to defend and retain the city and its surrounding region until the end of the Italo-Turkish War on 18 October 1912. Mustafa Kemal, Enver Bey, Fethi Bey and the other Ottoman military commanders in Libya had to return to Ottoman Europe following the outbreak of the Balkan Wars on 8 October 1912. Losing the war, the Ottoman government had to surrender Tripolitania, Fezzan and Cyrenaica (3 provinces forming present-day Libya) to the Kingdom of Italy with the secret Treaty of Ouchy (the public version is the Treaty of Lausanne (1912)) signed ten days later, on 18 October.[49] 
Balkan Wars (1912–13)
Main article: Balkan Wars
See also: First Balkan War and Second Balkan War
On 1 December 1912, Mustafa Kemal arrived at his new headquarters on the Gallipoli peninsula and during the First Balkan War, he took part in the amphibious landing at Bulair on the coast of Thrace that was commanded by Binbasi Fethi Bey, but this offensive was repulsed during the Battle of Bulair by Georgi Todorov's 7th Rila Infantry Division[50] under the command of Stiliyan Kovachev's Bulgarian Fourth Army.[51] 
In June 1913, during the Second Balkan War, he took part in the Ottoman Army forces[52] commanded by Kaymakam Enver Bey that recovered Dimetoka and Edirne (Adrianople, the capital city of the Ottoman Empire between 1365 and 1453, thus of utmost historic importance for the Turks) together with most of eastern Thrace from the Bulgarians. 
In 1913, he was appointed the Ottoman military attaché to all Balkan states (his office was in Sofia, Bulgaria) and promoted to the rank of Kaymakam (Lieutenant Colonel / Colonel) on 1 March 1914.[33] 
First World War (1914–18)
Main article: World War I
See also: Gallipoli Campaign and Middle Eastern theatre of World War I
 

Colonel Mustafa Kemal Bey in the trenches of Gallipoli with his soldiers, 1915
In 1914, the Ottoman Empire entered the European and Middle Eastern theatres of World War I allied with the Central Powers. Mustafa Kemal was given the task of organizing and commanding the 19th Division attached to the Fifth Army during the Battle of Gallipoli. Mustafa Kemal became the front-line commander after correctly anticipating where the Allies would attack and holding his position until they retreated. Following the Battle of Gallipoli, Mustafa Kemal served in Edirne until 14 January 1916. He was then assigned to the command of the XVI Corps of the Second Army and sent to the Caucasus Campaign after the massive Russian offensive had reached key Anatolian cities. On 7 August, Mustafa Kemal rallied his troops and mounted a counteroffensive.[53] Two of his divisions captured Bitlis and Mus, upsetting the calculations of the Russian Command.[54] 
Following this victory, the CUP government in Constantinople proposed to establish a new army in Hejaz (Hicaz Kuvve-i Seferiyesi) and appoint Mustafa Kemal to its command, but he refused the proposal and this army was never established.[46] Instead, on 7 March 1917, Mustafa Kemal Pasha was promoted from the command of the XVI Corps to the overall command of the Second Army, although the Czar's armies were soon withdrawn when the Russian Revolution erupted.[46][53] 
 

Colonel Mustafa Kemal Bey with Ottoman military officers during the Battle of Gallipoli, Çanakkale, 1915
 

Honorary aide-de-camp of the Sultan on the strip with Mustafa Kemal Pasha as the Commander of the Yildirim Army Group, 1918
In July 1917, he was appointed to the command of the Seventh Army, replacing Fevzi Pasha on 7 August 1917, who was under the command of the German general Erich von Falkenhayn's Yildirim Army Group (after the British forces of General Edmund Allenby captured Jerusalem in December 1917, Erich von Falkenhayn was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders who became the new commander of the Yildirim Army Group in early 1918.)[46] Mustafa Kemal Pasha could not get along well with General von Falkenhayn and, together with Miralay Ismet Bey, wrote a report to Grand Vizier Talaat Pasha regarding the grim situation and lack of adequate resources in the Palestinian front; but Talaat Pasha ignored their observations and refused their suggestion to form a stronger defensive line to the north, in Ottoman Syria (in parts of the Beirut Vilayet, Damascus Vilayet and Aleppo Vilayet), with Turks instead of Germans in command.[46] Following the rejection of his report, Mustafa Kemal resigned from the Seventh Army and returned to Constantinople.[46] There, he was assigned with the task of accompanying the crown prince (and future sultan) Mehmed Vahideddin during his train trip to Austria-Hungary and Germany.[46] While in Germany, Mustafa Kemal visited the German lines in the west European front and came to the conclusion that the Central Powers would soon lose the war.[46] He did not hesitate to openly express this opinion to Kaiser Wilhelm II and his high-ranking generals in person.[46] During the return trip, he briefly stayed in Karlsbad and Vienna for medical treatment.[46] 
When Mehmed VI became the new Sultan of the Ottoman Empire in July 1918, he called Mustafa Kemal Pasha to Constantinople, and in August 1918 assigned him to the command of the Seventh Army in Palestine.[46] Mustafa Kemal arrived in Aleppo on 26 August 1918, then continued south to his headquarters in Nablus. The Seventh Army was holding the central sector of the front lines. On 19 September, at the beginning of the Battle of Megiddo, the Eighth Army was holding the coastal flank, but fell apart and Liman Pasha ordered the Seventh Army to withdraw to the north in order to prevent the British from conducting a short envelopment to the Jordan River. The Seventh Army retired towards the Jordan River but was destroyed by British aerial bombardment during its retreat from Nablus on 21 September 1918.[55] Nevertheless, Mustafa Kemal managed to form a defense line to the north of Aleppo. According to Lord Kinross, Mustafa Kemal was the only Turkish general in the war who never suffered a defeat.[56] 
The war ended with the Armistice of Mudros which was signed on 30 October 1918, and all German and Austro-Hungarian troops in the Ottoman Empire were granted ample time to withdraw. On 31 October, Kemal was appointed to the command of the Yildirim Army Group, replacing Liman von Sanders. He organized the distribution of weapons to the civilians in Antep in case of a defensive conflict against the invading Allies.[46] 
Mustafa Kemal Pasha's last active service in the Ottoman Army was organizing the return of the Ottoman troops left behind to the south of this line. In early November 1918, the Yildirim Army Group was officially dissolved and Mustafa Kemal returned to an occupied Constantinople, the Ottoman capital, on 13 November 1918.[46] For a period he worked at the headquarters of the Ministry of War (Harbiye Nezareti) in Constantinople and continued his activities in this city until 16 May 1919.[46] Along the established lines of the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, the Allies (British, Italian, French and Greek forces) occupied Anatolia. The occupation of Constantinople, which was followed by the occupation of Izmir (the two largest Ottoman cities in that period) sparked the establishment of the Turkish National Movement and the Turkish War of Independence.[57] 
Turkish War of Independence (1919–1923)
Main article: Turkish War of Independence
See also: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's leadership of the independence war
 

Mustafa Kemal Pasha (right) in Ankara with Ismet Pasha (left)
Fahri Yaver-i Hazret-i Sehriyari ("Honorary Aide-de-camp to His Majesty Sultan") Mirliva Mustafa Kemal Pasha was assigned as the inspector of the Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate to reorganize what remained of the Ottoman military units and to improve internal security on 30 April 1919.[58] On 19 May 1919, he reached Samsun. His first goal was the establishment of an organized national movement against the occupying forces. In June 1919, he issued the Amasya Circular, declaring the independence of the country was in danger. He resigned from the Ottoman Army on 8 July and the Ottoman government issued a warrant for his arrest. Later, he was condemned to death. 
On 4 September 1919, he assembled a congress in Sivas. Those who opposed the Allies in various provinces in Turkey issued a declaration named Misak-i Millî ("National Pact"). Mustafa Kemal was appointed as the head of the executive committee of the congress. This gave Mustafa Kemal the legitimacy he needed for his future politics.[59] (See Sivas Congress.) 
 

Prominent nationalists at the Sivas Congress. Left to right: Muzaffer Kiliç, Rauf (Orbay), Bekir Sami (Kunduh), Mustafa Kemal (Atatürk), Rusen Esref Ünaydin, Cemil Cahit (Toydemir), Cevat Abbas (Gürer).
The last election to the Ottoman parliament held in December 1919 gave a sweeping majority to candidates of the "Association for Defense of Rights for Anatolia and Roumelia (Anadolu ve Rumeli Müdafaa-i Hukuk Cemiyeti)", headed by Mustafa Kemal, who himself remained in Ankara. The fourth (and last) term of the parliament opened in Constantinople on 12 January 1920. It was dissolved by British forces on 18 March 1920, shortly after it adopted the Misak-i Millî ("National Pact"). Mustafa Kemal called for a national election to establish a new Turkish Parliament seated in Ankara[60] – the "Grand National Assembly" (GNA). On 23 April 1920, the GNA opened with Mustafa Kemal as the speaker; this act effectively created the situation of diarchy in the country. 
On 10 August 1920, the Ottoman Grand Vizier Damat Ferid Pasha signed the Treaty of Sèvres, finalizing plans for the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, including the regions that Turkish nationals viewed as their heartland. Mustafa Kemal insisted on the country's complete independence and the safeguarding of interests of the Turkish majority on "Turkish soil". He persuaded the GNA to gather a National Army. The GNA Army faced the Caliphate army propped up by the Allied occupation forces and had the immediate task of fighting the Armenian forces in the Eastern Front and the Greek forces advancing eastward from Smyrna (modern-day Izmir) that they had occupied in May 1919, on the Western Front. In January 1920, Mustafa Kemal advanced his troops into Marash where the Battle of Marash ensued against the French Armenian Legion. The battle resulted in a Turkish victory alongside the massacres of 5,000–12,000 Armenians spelling the end of the remaining Armenian population in the region.[61][62][63][64][65] 
 

Mustafa Kemal Pasha at Kocatepe Hill during the Battle of Dumlupinar on 26–30 August 1922
The GNA military successes against the Democratic Republic of Armenia in the autumn of 1920 and later against the Greeks were made possible[66] by a steady supply of gold and armaments to the kemalists from the Russian Bolshevik government from the autumn 1920 onwards. 
After a series of battles during the Greco-Turkish war, the Greek army advanced as far as the Sakarya River, just eighty kilometers west of the GNA. On 5 August 1921, Mustafa Kemal was promoted to Commander in chief of the forces by the GNA.[67] The ensuing Battle of Sakarya was fought from 23 August to 13 September 1921 and ended with the defeat of the Greeks. After this victory, on 19 September 1921, Mustafa Kemal Pasha was given by the Grand National Assembly the rank of Maresal and the title of Gazi. The Allies, ignoring the extent of Kemal's successes, hoped to impose a modified version of the Treaty of Sèvres as a peace settlement on Ankara, but the proposal was rejected. In August 1922, Kemal launched an all-out attack on the Greek lines at Afyonkarahisar in the Battle of Dumlupinar and Turkish forces regained control of Smyrna on 9 September 1922.[68] On 10 September 1922, Mustafa Kemal sent a telegram to the League of Nations saying that the Turkish population was so worked up that the Ankara Government would not be responsible for massacres.[69] 

Establishment of the Republic of Turkey
See also: Treaty of Lausanne (1923)
The Conference of Lausanne began on 21 November 1922. Turkey, represented by Ismet Inönü of the GNA, refused any proposal that would compromise Turkish sovereignty,[70] such as the control of Turkish finances, the Capitulations, the Straits and other issues. Although the conference halted on 4 February, it continued after 23 April mainly on the economic issues.[54] On 24 July 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne was signed by the Powers with the GNA, thus recognising the latter as the government of Turkey. 
On 29 October 1923, the Republic of Turkey was proclaimed.[71] Since then Republic Day has been celebrated as a national holiday on this date.[72] 
Presidency
For conceptual analysis, see Kemalist ideology and Atatürk's Reforms.
 

Mustafa Kemal Pasha on the cover of Time magazine's issue of 24 March 1923. The title reads: "Where is a Turk his own master?"
With the establishment of the Republic of Turkey, efforts to modernise the country started. The new government analyzed the institutions and constitutions of Western states such as France, Sweden, Italy, and Switzerland and adapted them to the needs and characteristics of the Turkish nation. Highlighting the public's lack of knowledge regarding Kemal's intentions, the public cheered: "We are returning to the days of the first caliphs."[73] Mustafa Kemal placed Fevzi Çakmak, Kâzim Özalp and Ismet Inönü in political positions where they could institute his reforms. Mustafa Kemal capitalized on his reputation as an efficient military leader and spent the following years, up until his death in 1938, instituting political, economic, and social reforms. In doing so, he transformed Turkish society from perceiving itself as a Muslim part of a vast Empire into a modern, democratic, and secular nation-state. This had a positive influence on human capital because what from now on mattered at school was science and education; Islam was concentrated in mosques and religious places.[74] 
Domestic policies
Mustafa Kemal's basic tenet was the complete independence of the country.[75] He clarified his position:
...by complete independence, we mean of course complete economic, financial, juridical, military, cultural independence and freedom in all matters. Being deprived of independence in any of these is equivalent to the nation and country being deprived of all its independence.[76] 
He led wide-ranging reforms in social, cultural, and economical aspects, establishing the new Republic's backbone of legislative, judicial, and economic structures. Though he was later idealized by some as an originator of sweeping reforms, many of his reformist ideas were already common in Ottoman intellectual circles at the turn of the 20th century, and were expressed more openly after the Young Turk Revolution.[77] 
Mustafa Kemal created a banner to mark the changes between the old Ottoman and the new republican rule. Each change was symbolized as an arrow in this banner. This defining ideology of the Republic of Turkey is referred to as the "Six Arrows", or Kemalist ideology. Kemalist ideology is based on Mustafa Kemal's conception of realism and pragmatism.[78] The fundamentals of nationalism, populism and etatism were all defined under the Six Arrows. These fundamentals were not new in world politics or, indeed, among the elite of Turkey. What made them unique was that these interrelated fundamentals were formulated specifically for Turkey's needs. A good example is the definition and application of secularism; the Kemalist secular state significantly differed from predominantly Christian states. 
Emergence of the state, 1923–1924
 

Mustafa Kemal Pasha in 1923, with members of the Mevlevi Order, before its institutional expression became illegal and their dervish lodge was changed into the Mevlana Museum. The Mevlevi Order managed to transform itself into a nonpolitical organization which still exists.
 

In 1924, during his speech in Bursa
 

A political satire from the one-party period depicting Mustafa Kemal, the leader of the CHP, choosing the party's candidates for prospective MPs, to be elected in the incoming parliamentary elections. During the one-party state, the candidates had only one party's (CHP) list to join.
Mustafa Kemal's private journal entries dated before the establishment of the republic in 1923 show that he believed in the importance of the sovereignty of the people. In forging the new republic, the Turkish revolutionaries turned their back on the perceived corruption and decadence of cosmopolitan Constantinople and its Ottoman heritage.[79] For instance, they made Ankara the country's new capital and reformed the Turkish postal service. Once a provincial town deep in Anatolia, Ankara was thus turned into the center of the independence movement. Atatürk wanted a "direct government by the Assembly"[80] and visualized a representative democracy, parliamentary sovereignty, where the National Parliament would be the ultimate source of power.[80] 
In the following years, he altered his stance somewhat; the country needed an immense amount of reconstruction, and that "direct government by the Assembly" could not survive in such an environment. The revolutionaries faced challenges from the supporters of the old Ottoman regime, and also from the supporters of newer ideologies such as communism and fascism. Mustafa Kemal saw the consequences of fascist and communist doctrines in the 1920s and 1930s and rejected both.[81] He prevented the spread into Turkey of the totalitarian party rule which held sway in the Soviet Union, Germany and Italy.[82] Some perceived his opposition and silencing of these ideologies as a means of eliminating competition; others believed it was necessary to protect the young Turkish state from succumbing to the instability of new ideologies and competing factions.[citation needed] 
The heart of the new republic was the GNA, established during the Turkish War of Independence by Mustafa Kemal.[83] The elections were free and used an egalitarian electoral system that was based on a general ballot.[83] Deputies at the GNA served as the voice of Turkish society by expressing its political views and preferences. It had the right to select and control both the government and the Prime Minister. Initially, it also acted as a legislative power, controlling the executive branch and, if necessary, acted as an organ of scrutiny under the Turkish Constitution of 1921.[83] The Turkish Constitution of 1924 set a loose separation of powers between the legislative and the executive organs of the state, whereas the separation of these two within the judiciary system was a strict one. Mustafa Kemal, then the President, occupied a powerful position in this political system. 
The one-party regime was established de facto in 1925 after the adoption of the 1924 constitution. The only political party of the GNA was the "Peoples Party", founded by Mustafa Kemal on 9 September 1923. (But according to the party culture the foundation date was the opening day of Sivas Congress on 4 September 1919). On 10 November 1924 it was renamed Cumhuriyet Halk Firkasi or Republican People's Party (the word firka was replaced by the word parti in 1935). 
Civic independence and the Caliphate, 1924–1925
Abolition of the Caliphate was an important dimension in Mustafa Kemal's drive to reform the political system and to promote the national sovereignty. By the consensus of the Muslim majority in early centuries, the caliphate was the core political concept of Sunni Islam.[84] Abolishing the sultanate was easier because the survival of the Caliphate at the time satisfied the partisans of the sultanate. This produced a split system with the new republic on one side and an Islamic form of government with the Caliph on the other side, and Mustafa Kemal and Inönü worried that "it nourished the expectations that the sovereign would return under the guise of Caliph."[85] Caliph Abdülmecid II was elected after the abolition of the sultanate (1922). 
The caliph had his own personal treasury and also had a personal service that included military personnel; Mustafa Kemal said that there was no "religious" or "political" justification for this. He believed that Caliph Abdülmecid II was following in the steps of the sultans in domestic and foreign affairs: accepting of and responding to foreign representatives and reserve officers, and participating in official ceremonies and celebrations.[86] He wanted to integrate the powers of the caliphate into the powers of the GNA. His initial activities began on 1 January 1924, when[86] Inönü, Çakmak and Özalp consented to the abolition of the caliphate. The caliph made a statement to the effect that he would not interfere with political affairs.[87] On 1 March 1924, at the Assembly, Mustafa Kemal said: 
The religion of Islam will be elevated if it will cease to be a political instrument, as had been the case in the past.[88] 
On 3 March 1924, the caliphate was officially abolished and its powers within Turkey were transferred to the GNA. Other Muslim nations debated the validity of Turkey's unilateral abolition of the caliphate as they decided whether they should confirm the Turkish action or appoint a new caliph.[87] A "Caliphate Conference" was held in Cairo in May 1926 and a resolution was passed declaring the caliphate "a necessity in Islam", but failed to implement this decision.[87] 
Two other Islamic conferences were held in Mecca (1926) and Jerusalem (1931), but failed to reach a consensus.[87] Turkey did not accept the re-establishment of the caliphate and perceived it as an attack to its basic existence; while Mustafa Kemal and the reformists continued their own way.[89] 
On 8 April 1924, sharia courts were abolished with the law "Mehakim-i Ser'iyenin Ilgasina ve Mehakim Teskilatina Ait Ahkami Muaddil Kanun".[90][91] 
The removal of the caliphate was followed by an extensive effort to establish the separation of governmental and religious affairs. Education was the cornerstone in this effort. In 1923, there were three main educational groups of institutions. The most common institutions were medreses based on Arabic, the Qur'an and memorization. The second type of institution was idadî and sultanî, the reformist schools of the Tanzimat era. The last group included colleges and minority schools in foreign languages that used the latest teaching models in educating pupils. The old medrese education was modernized.[92] Mustafa Kemal changed the classical Islamic education for a vigorously promoted reconstruction of educational institutions.[92] Mustafa Kemal linked educational reform to the liberation of the nation from dogma, which he believed was more important than the Turkish War of Independence. He declared: 
Today, our most important and most productive task is the national education [unification and modernization] affairs. We have to be successful in national education affairs and we shall be. The liberation of a nation is only achieved through this way."[93] 
In the summer of 1924, Mustafa Kemal invited American educational reformer John Dewey to Ankara to advise him on how to reform Turkish education.[92] His public education reforms aimed to prepare citizens for roles in public life through increasing the public literacy. He wanted to institute compulsory primary education for both girls and boys; since then this effort has been an ongoing task for the republic. He pointed out that one of the main targets of education in Turkey had to be raising a generation nourished with what he called the "public culture". The state schools established a common curriculum which became known as the "unification of education." 
 

Atatürk with his top hat
 

Atatürk with his Panama hat just after the Kastamonu speech in 1925
Unification of education was put into force on 3 March 1924 by the Law on Unification of Education (No. 430). With the new law, education became inclusive, organized on a model of the civil community. In this new design, all schools submitted their curriculum to the "Ministry of National Education", a government agency modelled after other countries' ministries of education. Concurrently, the republic abolished the two ministries and made clergy subordinate to the department of religious affairs, one of the foundations of secularism in Turkey. The unification of education under one curriculum ended "clerics or clergy of the Ottoman Empire", but was not the end of religious schools in Turkey; they were moved to higher education until later governments restored them to their former position in secondary after Mustafa Kemal's death. 
Beginning in the fall of 1925, Mustafa Kemal encouraged the Turks to wear modern European attire.[94] He was determined to force the abandonment of the sartorial traditions of the Middle East and finalize a series of dress reforms, which were originally started by Mahmud II.[94] The fez was established by Sultan Mahmud II in 1826 as part of the Ottoman Empire's modernization effort. The Hat Law of 1925 introduced the use of Western-style hats instead of the fez. Mustafa Kemal first made the hat compulsory for civil servants.[94] The guidelines for the proper dressing of students and state employees were passed during his lifetime; many civil servants adopted the hat willingly. In 1925, Mustafa Kemal wore a Panama hat during a public appearance in Kastamonu, one of the most conservative towns in Anatolia, to explain that the hat was the headgear of civilized nations. The last part of reform on dress emphasized the need to wear modern Western suits with neckties as well as Fedora and Derby-style hats instead of antiquated religion-based clothing such as the veil and turban in the Law Relating to Prohibited Garments of 1934. 
Even though he personally promoted modern dress for women, Mustafa Kemal never made specific reference to women's clothing in the law, as he believed that women would adapt to the new clothing styles of their own free will. He was frequently photographed on public business with his wife Lâtife Usakligil, who covered her head in accordance with Islamic tradition. He was also frequently photographed on public business with women wearing modern Western clothes. But it was Atatürk's adopted daughters, Sabiha Gökçen and Afet Inan, who provided the real role model for the Turkish women of the future. He wrote: "The religious covering of women will not cause difficulty ... This simple style [of headcovering] is not in conflict with the morals and manners of our society."[95] 
On 30 August 1925, Mustafa Kemal's view on religious insignia used outside places of worship was introduced in his Kastamonu speech. This speech also had another position. He said: 
In the face of knowledge, science, and of the whole extent of radiant civilization, I cannot accept the presence in Turkey's civilized community of people primitive enough to seek material and spiritual benefits in the guidance of sheiks. The Turkish republic cannot be a country of sheiks, dervishes, and disciples. The best, the truest order is the order of civilization. To be a man it is enough to carry out the requirements of civilization. The leaders of dervish orders will understand the truth of my words, and will themselves close down their lodges [tekke] and admit that their disciplines have grown up.[96][97] 
On 2 September, the government issued a decree closing down all Sufi orders and the tekkes. Mustafa Kemal ordered their dervish lodges to be converted to museums, such as Mevlana Museum in Konya. The institutional expression of Sufism became illegal in Turkey; a politically neutral form of Sufism, functioning as social associations, was permitted to exist.[citation needed] 
The abolition of the caliphate and other cultural reforms were met with fierce opposition. The conservative elements were not happy and they launched attacks on the Kemalist reformists.[87] 
Opposition to Mustafa Kemal in 1924–1927
 

Kemal Atatürk on a coin

Play media

Atatürk during one of his Anatolian tours
In 1924, while the "Issue of Mosul" was on the table, Sheikh Said began to organize the Sheikh Said Rebellion. Sheikh Said was a wealthy Kurdish[citation needed] tribal chief of a local Naqshbandi order. He emphasized the issue of religion; he not only opposed the abolition of the Caliphate, but also the adoption of civil codes based on Western models, the closure of religious orders, the ban on polygamy, and the new obligatory civil marriage. Sheikh stirred up his followers against the policies of the government, which he considered anti-Islamic. In an effort to restore Islamic law, Sheik's forces moved through the countryside, seized government offices and marched on the important cities of Elazig and Diyarbakir.[98] Members of the government saw the Sheikh Said Rebellion as an attempt at a counter-revolution. They urged immediate military action to prevent its spread. The "Law for the Maintenance of Public Order" was passed to deal with the rebellion on 4 March 1925. It gave the government exceptional powers and included the authority to shut down subversive groups, but was repealed on 4 March 1929. 
There were also parliamentarians in the GNA who were not happy with these changes[who?]. So many members were denounced as opposition sympathizers at a private meeting of the Republican People's Party (CHP) that Mustafa Kemal expressed his fear of being among the minority in his own party.[99] He decided not to purge this group.[99] After a censure motion gave the chance to have a breakaway group, Kazim Karabekir, along with his friends, established such a group on 17 October 1924. The censure became a confidence vote at the CHP for Mustafa Kemal. On 8 November, the motion was rejected by 148 votes to 18, and 41 votes were absent.[99] CHP held all but one seat in the parliament. After the majority of the CHP chose him[99] Mustafa Kemal said, "the Turkish nation is firmly determined to advance fearlessly on the path of the republic, civilization and progress".[99] 
On 17 November 1924, the breakaway group established the Progressive Republican Party (PRP) with 29 deputies and the first multi-party system began. Some of Mustafa Kemal's closest associates who had supported him in the early days of the War of Independence such as Rauf Bey (later Rauf Orbay), Refet Pasha and Ali Fuat Pasha (later Ali Fuat Cebesoy) were among the members of the new party. The PRP's economic program suggested liberalism, in contrast to the state socialism of CHP, and its social program was based on conservatism in contrast to the modernism of CHP. Leaders of the party strongly supported the Kemalist revolution in principle, but had different opinions on the cultural revolution and the principle of secularism.[100] The PRP was not against Mustafa Kemal's main positions as declared in its program; they supported establishing secularism in the country and the civic law, or as stated, "the needs of the age" (article 3) and the uniform system of education (article 49).[101] These principles were set by the leaders at the onset. The only legal opposition became a home for all kinds of differing views. 
During 1926, a plot to assassinate Mustafa Kemal was uncovered in Izmir. It originated with a former deputy who had opposed the abolition of the Caliphate. Investigation shifted from an inquiry into the planners to an investigation ostensibly to uncover subversive activities but in truth used to undermine those disagreeing with Mustafa Kemal's cultural revolution. The sweeping investigation brought a number of political activists before the tribunal, including Karabekir, the leader of PRP. A number of surviving leaders of the Committee of Union and Progress, who were at best second-rank in the Turkish movement, including Cavid, Ahmed Sükrü, and Ismail Canbulat, were found guilty of treason and hanged.[102] The investigations found a link between the members of the PRP and the Sheikh Said Rebellion. The PRP was dissolved following the outcomes of the trial. The pattern of organized opposition, however, was broken. This action was the only broad political purge during Atatürk's presidency. Mustafa Kemal's saying, "My mortal body will turn into dust, but the Republic of Turkey will last forever," was regarded as a will after the assassination attempt.[103] 
Modernization efforts, 1926–1930

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 

President Kemal at the 1927 opening of the State Art and Sculpture Museum
 

President Mustafa Kemal Atatürk at the library of the Çankaya Presidential Residence in Ankara, on 16 July 1929
 

Attending a class at the Law School of the Istanbul Darülfünunu in 1930

Play media

This documentary film is about Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and the modernization of the Turkish Republic.
In the years following 1926, Mustafa Kemal introduced a radical departure from previous reformations established by the Ottoman Empire.[104] For the first time in history, Islamic law was separated from secular law, and restricted to matters of religion.[104] Mustafa Kemal said: 
We must liberate our concepts of justice, our laws and our legal institutions from the bonds which, even though they are incompatible with the needs of our century, still hold a tight grip on us.[105] 
On 1 March 1926, the Turkish penal code was passed. It was modelled after the Italian Penal Code. On 4 October 1926, Islamic courts were closed. Establishing the civic law needed time, so Mustafa Kemal delayed the inclusion of the principle of laïcité until 5 February 1937. 
Ottoman practice discouraged social interaction between men and women in keeping with Islamic practice of sex segregation. Mustafa Kemal began developing social reforms very early, as was evident in his personal journal. He and his staff discussed issues like abolishing the veiling of women and the integration of women into the outside world. The clue on how he was planning to tackle the issue was stated in his journal in November 1915: 
The social change can come by (1) educating capable mothers who are knowledgeable about life; (2) giving freedom to women; (3) a man can change his morals, thoughts, and feelings by leading a common life with a woman; as there is an inborn tendency towards the attraction of mutual affection.[106] 
Mustafa Kemal needed a new civil code to establish his second major step of giving freedom to women. The first part was the education of girls and was established with the unification of education. On 4 October 1926, the new Turkish civil code passed. It was modelled after the Swiss Civil Code. Under the new code, women gained equality with men in such matters as inheritance and divorce. Mustafa Kemal did not consider gender a factor in social organization. According to his view, society marched towards its goal with men and women united. He believed that it was scientifically impossible for him to achieve progress and to become civilized if the gender separation continued as in Ottoman times.[107] During a meeting he declaimed: 
To the women: Win for us the battle of education and you will do yet more for your country than we have been able to do. It is to you that I appeal.
To the men: If henceforward the women do not share in the social life of the nation, we shall never attain to our full development. We shall remain irremediably backward, incapable of treating on equal terms with the civilizations of the West.[108] 
In 1927, the State Art and Sculpture Museum (Turkish: Ankara Resim ve Heykel Müzesi) opened its doors. The museum highlighted sculpture, which was little practised in Turkey owing to the Islamic tradition of avoiding idolatry. Mustafa Kemal believed that "culture is the foundation of the Turkish Republic,"[109] and described modern Turkey's ideological thrust as "a creation of patriotism blended with a lofty humanist ideal." He included both his own nation's creative legacy and what he saw as the admirable values of global civilization. The pre-Islamic culture of the Turks became the subject of extensive research, and particular emphasis was laid upon Turkish culture widespread before the Seljuk and Ottoman civilizations. He instigated study of Anatolian civilizations—Phrygians and Lydians, Sumerians and Hittites. To attract current public attention to past cultures, he personally named the "Sümerbank" (1932) after the Sumerians, and the "Etibank" (1935) after the Hittites. He also stressed the folk arts of the countryside as a wellspring of Turkish creativity. 
 

President Mustafa Kemal Atatürk introducing the new Turkish alphabet to the people of Kayseri on 20 September 1928
In the spring of 1928, Mustafa Kemal met in Ankara with several linguists and professors from all over Turkey where he unveiled to them a plan of his to implement a new alphabet for the written Turkish language based on a modified Latin alphabet. The new Turkish alphabet would serve as a replacement for the old Arabic script and as a solution to the literacy problem in Turkey, as the Arabic script does not feature any vowels while the Turkish language has eight. When he asked them at how long it would take, in their professional opinion, to implement the new alphabet into the Turkish language, most of the professors and linguists said between three and five years. Mustafa Kemal was said to have scoffed and openly stated, "we shall do it in three to five months".[citation needed] 
Over the next several months, Mustafa Kemal pressed for the introduction of the new Turkish alphabet as well as made public announcements to the upcoming overhaul of the new alphabet. On 1 November 1928 he introduced the new Turkish alphabet and abolished the use of Arabic script. At the time, literate citizens of the country comprised as little as 10% of the population. Dewey noted to Mustafa Kemal that learning how to read and write in Turkish with the Arabic script took roughly three years with rather strenuous methods at the elementary level.[92] They used the Ottoman Language written in the Arabic script with Arabic and Persian loan vocabulary.[92] The creation of the new Turkish alphabet as a variant of the Latin alphabet was undertaken by the Language Commission (Turkish: Dil Encümeni) with the initiative of Mustafa Kemal.[92] The tutelage was received from an Ottoman-Armenian scientist Hagop Dilaçar.[110] The first Turkish newspaper using the new alphabet was published on 15 December 1928. Mustafa Kemal himself travelled the countryside in order to teach citizens the new alphabet. After vigorous campaigns, the literacy rate increased from 10.6% in 1927 to 22.4% in 1940.[111] A number of congresses were organized on scientific issues, education, history, economics, arts and language.[112] Libraries were systematically developed, mobile libraries and book transport systems were set up to serve districts and remote places.[113] Literacy reform was also supported by strengthening the private publishing sector with a new law on copyrights. 
 

Mustafa Kemal meeting King Amanullah Khan and Queen Soraya Tarzi of Afghanistan in May 1928
 

In 1930, leaving the parliament after the 7th-year celebration meeting. Ismet Inönü, the second President of Turkey, is to the left.
Mustafa Kemal promoted modern teaching methods at the primary education level, and Dewey took a place of honour.[92] Dewey presented a paradigmatic set of recommendations designed for developing societies that are moving towards modernity in his "Report and Recommendation for the Turkish educational system."[92] He was interested in adult education for the goal of forming a skill base in the country. Turkish women were taught not only child care, dress-making and household management, but also skills needed to join the economy outside the home. Turkish education became a state-supervised system, which was designed to create a skill base for the social and economic progress of the country.[114] His "unified" education program was designed to educate responsible citizens as well as useful and appreciated members of society.[92] Turkish education became an integrative system, aimed to alleviate poverty and used female education to establish gender equality. Atatürk himself put special emphasis on the education of girls and supported coeducation, introducing it at university level in 1923–24 and establishing it as the norm throughout the educational system by 1927.[115] Atatürk's reforms on education made education much more accessible: between 1923 and 1938, the number of students attending primary schools increased by 224% from 342,000 to 765,000, the number of students attending middle schools increased by 12.5 times, from around 6,000 to 74,000 and the number of students attending high schools increased by almost 17 times, from 1,200 to 21,000.[116] 
Mustafa Kemal generated media attention to propagate modern education during this period. He instigated official education meetings called "Science Boards" and "Education Summits." to discuss the quality of education, training issues and certain basic educational principles. He said, "our schools [curriculum] should aim to provide opportunities for all pupils to learn and to achieve." He was personally engaged with the development of two textbooks. The first one was Turkish: Vatandas Için Medeni Bilgiler (1930). The second, Geometry (1937), was a text for high schools. The Vatandas Için Medeni Bilgiler (Civic knowledge for the citizens) introduced the science of comparative government and explained the means of administering public trust by explaining the rules of governance as applied to the new state institutions. 
Opposition to Mustafa Kemal in 1930–1931
 

Mustafa Kemal with the Liberal Republican Party leader Ali Fethi Okyar and his daughter in Yalova, on 13 August 1930
On 11 August 1930, Mustafa Kemal decided to try a multiparty movement once again and asked Ali Fethi Okyar to establish a new party. He insisted on the protection of secular reforms. The brand-new Liberal Republican Party succeeded all around the country. Without the establishment of a real political spectrum, once again, the party became the center to opposition of Atatürk's reforms, particularly in regard to the role of religion in public life. 
On 23 December 1930, a chain of violent incidents occurred, starting with the rebellion of Islamic fundamentalists in Menemen, a small town in the Aegean region. This so-called Menemen Incident was considered a serious threat against secular reforms. 
In November 1930, Ali Fethi Okyar dissolved his own party. A more lasting multi-party period of the Republic of Turkey began in 1945. In 1950, the CHP released the majority position to the Democratic Party. There are arguments that Mustafa Kemal's single party rule did not promote direct democracy. The reason experiments with pluralism failed during this period was that not all groups in the country had agreed to a minimal consensus regarding shared values (mainly secularism) and shared rules for conflict resolution. In response to such criticisms, Mustafa Kemal's biographer Andrew Mango said: "between the two wars, democracy could not be sustained in many relatively richer and better-educated societies. Atatürk's enlightened authoritarianism left a reasonable space for free private lives. More could not have been expected in his lifetime."[117] Even though, at times, he did not appear to be a democrat in his actions, he always supported the idea of building a civil society: a system of voluntary civic and social organizations and institutions as opposed to the force-backed structures of the state. In one of his many speeches about the importance of democracy, Mustafa Kemal said in 1933: 
Republic means the democratic administration of the state. We founded the Republic, reaching its tenth year. It should enforce all the requirements of democracy as the time comes.[118] 
Modernization efforts, 1931–1938
 

In 1931, during the establishment ceremony of the Turkish History Institution. Atatürk is standing in the middle with Munis Tekinalp and Yusuf Akçura on the left.
In 1931, Mustafa Kemal established the Turkish Language Association for conducting research works in the Turkish language (Turkish: Türk Dil Kurumu). The Turkish Historical Society (Turkish: Türk Tarih Kurumu) was established in 1931, and began maintaining archives in 1932 for conducting research works on the history of Turkey.[119] On 1 January 1928, he established the Turkish Education Association,[119] which supported intelligent and hard-working children in financial need, as well as making material and scientific contributions to the educational life. In 1933, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk ordered the reorganization of Istanbul University into a modern institution and later established Ankara University in the capital city.[120] 
 

Atatürk visits Istanbul University after its reorganization with the University Law of 31 May 1933, which introduced mixed-sex education to the academies, colleges and universities in Turkey. In 1915, during the Ottoman period, a separate section for girl students named the Inas Darülfünunu was opened as a branch of the Istanbul Darülfünunu, the predecessor of the modern Istanbul University.
 

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk during a coffee and smoking break, 1936
Mustafa Kemal dealt with the translation of scientific terminology into Turkish.[121] He wanted the Turkish language reform to be methodologically based. Any attempt to "cleanse" the Turkish language of foreign influence without modelling the integral structure of the language was inherently wrong to him. He personally oversaw the development of the Sun Language Theory (Turkish: Günes Dil Teorisi), which was a linguistic theory which proposed that all human languages were descendants of one Central Asian primal language. His interest started with the works by the French scientist Hilaire de Barenton titled L'Origine des Langues, des Religions et des Peuples, which postulates that all languages originated from hieroglyphs and cuneiform used by Sumerians,[122] and the paper of Austrian linguist Dr. Hermann F. Kvergic of Vienna titled "La psychologie de quelques elements des langues Turques" ("the psychology of some elements of the Turkic Languages").[123] He introduced the Sun Language Theory into Turkish political and educational circles in 1935, although he did later correct the more extremist practices.[121] 
A politician, Saffet Arikan, who was the head of the Turkish Language Association, said "Ulu Önderimiz Ata Türk Mustafa Kemal" (Our Great Leader Ata Türk Mustafa Kemal) in the opening speech of the 2nd Language Day on 26 September 1934. Later, the surname "Atatürk" (father of the Turks) accepted as the surname of Mustafa Kemal Pasha after the adoption of the Family Surname Law.[124] Until the Surname Law, Turks did not have surnames but laqabs only, while Christian and Jewish minorities had used Turkish surnames since Ottoman times. 
Beginning in 1932, several hundred "People's Houses" (Turkish: Halk Evi) and "People's Rooms" (Halk Odasi) across the country allowed greater access to a wide variety of artistic activities, sports, and other cultural events. Atatürk supported and encouraged the visual and the plastic arts, which had been suppressed by the Ottoman leaders, who regarded depiction of the human form as idolatry. Many museums opened, architecture began to follow modern trends, and classical Western music, opera, and ballet, as well as the theatre, also took greater hold. Book and magazine publications increased as well, and the film industry began to grow. 
 

The original 1935 print of the first Quran in Turkish language, ordered by Atatürk
In 1932, a Qur'an in the Turkish language was read before a live audience and broadcast over the radio.[125] That same year, Mustafa Kemal wanted to "teach religion in Turkish to Turkish people who had been practising Islam without understanding it for centuries"[126] All Qur'ans in Turkey at the time were printed in Old Arabic. There was a rare polyglot Qu'ran written in Arabic, Persian, Turkish and Latin in the tetrapla style, prepared by savant Andrea Acolutho of Bernstadt and printed at Berlin in 1701.[127] In 1924, three Turkish translations published in Istanbul created controversy. Several renderings of the Qur'an in the Turkish language were read in front of the public.[125] These Turkish Qur'ans were fiercely opposed by religious people. This incident impelled many leading Muslim modernists to call upon the Turkish Parliament to sponsor a Qur'an translation of suitable quality.[128] With the support of Mustafa Kemal, the Parliament approved the project and the Directorate of Religious Affairs appointed Mehmet Akif (Ersoy) to compose a Qur'an translation, and an Islamic scholar Elmalili Hamdi Yazir to author a Turkish language Qur'anic commentary (tafsir) titled "Hak Dini Kur'an Dili." It was only in 1935 that the version read in public found its way to print.[129] Mustafa Kemal believed that the understanding of religion was too important to be left to a small group of people.[126] This included the central religious text of Islam. Mustafa Kemal's objective was to make the Qu'ran accessible to modern people, and therefore to translate it into modern languages.[126] 
In 1934, Mustafa Kemal commissioned the first Turkish operatic work, Özsoy. The opera, which was staged at the People's House in Ankara, was composed by Adnan Saygun and performed by soprano Semiha Berksoy.[130] 
In November 1934, Atatürk adopted his new signature designed by calligrapher Hagop Vahram Çerçiyan. It is used as his official signature on Turkish government buildings to this day. 
 

Eighteen female MPs joined the Turkish Parliament with the 1935 general elections.
On 5 December 1934, Turkey moved to grant full political rights to women, before several other European nations. The equal rights of women in marriage had already been established in the earlier Turkish civil code.[131] Women's place in Mustafa Kemal's cultural reforms was best expressed in the civic book prepared under his supervision.[132] Mustafa Kemal said: 
There is no logical explanation for the political disenfranchisement of women. Any hesitation and negative mentality on this subject is nothing more than a fading social phenomenon of the past. ...Women must have the right to vote and to be elected; because democracy dictates that, because there are interests that women must defend, and because there are social duties that women must perform.[133] 
The 1935 elections yielded 18 female MPs out of a total of 395 representatives, compared to nine out of 615 members of the British House of Commons and six out of 435 in the US House of Representatives inaugurated that year.[134] 
Unification and nationalisation efforts
When the modern Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, nationalism and secularism were two of the founding principles.[135] Atatürk aimed to create a nation state (Turkish: Ulus devlet) from the Turkish remnants of the Ottoman Empire. Kemalist ideology defines the "Turkish People" as "those who protect and promote the moral, spiritual, cultural and humanistic values of the Turkish Nation."[136] One of the goals of the establishment of the new Turkish state was to ensure "the domination of Turkish ethnic identity in every aspect of social life from the language that people speak in the streets to the language to be taught at schools, from the education to the industrial life, from the trade to the cadres of state officials, from the civil law to the settlement of citizens to particular regions."[137] The process of unification through Turkification continued and was fostered under Atatürk's government with such policies as Citizen speak Turkish! (Turkish: Vatandas Türkçe konus!), an initiative created by law students but sponsored by the government which aimed to put pressure on non-Turkish speakers to speak Turkish in public in the 1930s.[7][138][5][4][139][140][141] The campaign went beyond the measures of a mere policy of speaking Turkish, to an outright prevention of any other language.[7][138][142][143][144] The Surname law forbade certain surnames that contained connotations of foreign cultures, nations, tribes, and religions.[5][141][145][146] As a result, many ethnic Armenians, Greeks, and Kurds were forced to adopt last names of Turkish rendition.[145] Names ending with "yan, of, ef , viç, is, dis , poulos, aki, zade, shvili, madumu, veled, bin" (names that denote non-Turkish origins) could not be registered and were replaced by "-oglu."[147] The geographical name changes initiative by the Turkish government replaced non-Turkish geographical and topographic names within the Turkish Republic or the Ottoman Empire, with Turkish names.[148][149][6][150][151][152] The main proponent of the initiative has been a Turkish homogenization social-engineering campaign which aimed to assimilate geographical or topographical names that were deemed foreign and divisive against Turkish unity. The names that were considered foreign were usually of Armenian, Greek, Laz, Bulgarian, Kurdish, Assyrian, or Arabic origin.[148][6][151][152][153] The 1934 Resettlement Law (also known as the Law no. 2510) was a policy adopted by the Turkish government which set forth the basic principles of immigration.[154] The law, however, is regarded by some as a policy of assimilation of non-Turkish minorities through a forced and collective resettlement.[155] 
Foreign policies
Atatürk's foreign policy followed his motto, "peace at home, peace in the world".[156] a perception of peace linked to his project of civilization and modernization.[157] The outcomes of Atatürk's policies depended on the power of the parliamentary sovereignty established by the Republic.[158] The Turkish War of Independence was the last time Atatürk used his military might in dealing with other countries. Foreign issues were resolved by peaceful methods during his presidency. 
Issue of Mosul
 

During the visit of Abdullah I of Jordan
The "Issue of Mosul", a dispute with the United Kingdom over control of Mosul Province, was one of the first foreign affairs-related controversies of the new Republic. During the Mesopotamian campaign, Lieutenant General William Marshall followed the British War Office's instruction that "every effort was to be made to score as heavily as possible on the Tigris before the whistle blew", capturing Mosul three days after the signature of the Armistice of Mudros (30 October 1918).[159] In 1920, the Misak-i Milli, which consolidated the "Turkish lands", declared that Mosul Province was a part of the historic Turkish heartland. The British were in a precarious situation with the Issue of Mosul, and were adopting almost equally desperate measures to protect their interests. The Iraqi revolt against the British was put down by the RAF Iraq Command during the summer of 1920. From the British perspective, if Mustafa Kemal Atatürk stabilized Turkey, he would then turn his attention to Mosul and penetrate Mesopotamia, where the native population would probably join him thus bringing an insurgent and hostile Muslim nation to the very gates of India. 
In 1923, Mustafa Kemal tried to persuade the GNA that accepting the arbitration of the League of Nations at the Treaty of Lausanne over Mosul did not mean relinquishing Mosul, but rather waiting for a time when Turkey might be stronger. The artificially drawn border had an unsettling effect on the population on both sides. Later, it was claimed that Turkey began where oil ends, as the border was drawn by the British geophysicists based on the oil reserves. Atatürk did not want this separation.[160] The British Foreign Secretary attempted to disclaim any existence of oil in the Mosul area. On 23 January 1923, Lord Curzon argued that the existence of oil was no more than hypothetical.[159] However, according to Armstrong, "England wanted oil. Mosul and Kurds were the key."[161] 
While three inspectors from the League of Nations Committee were sent to the region to oversee the situation in 1924, the Sheikh Said rebellion, beginning in 1924 and escalating until 1927, set out to establish a new government positioned to cut Turkey's link to Mesopotamia. The relationship between the rebels and Britain was questioned. British assistance was sought after the rebels realised that the rebellion, or its expected outcome, could not stand by itself.[162] 
In 1925, the League of Nations formed a three-member committee to study the case while the Sheikh Said Rebellion was on the rise. Partly because of the continuing uncertainties along the northern frontier (present-day northern Iraq), the committee recommended that the region should be connected to Iraq with the condition that the UK would hold the British Mandate of Mesopotamia. By the end of March 1925, the necessary troop movements were completed, and the whole area of the Sheikh Said rebellion was encircled.[163] As a result of these manoeuvres, the revolt was put down. Britain, Iraq and Kemal made a treaty on 5 June 1926, which mostly followed the decisions of the League Council. In 1926, Kemal faced growing opposition to his reform policies, a continuing precarious economic situation, and a defeat in the Mosul issue. A large section of the Kurdish population and the Iraqi Turkmen were left on the other side of the border. The Sheikh Said Rebellion hastened both the imposition of the Republican Party and the speed of Atatürk's reforms. In 1925, the population was largely illiterate and disparate. Turkey was in ruins, reconstruction was difficult, poverty was everywhere and people were in pain, which fed separatist violence.[164] Rather than to a section of the population, Mustafa Kemal attributed the rebellion to a group of notables, who on 7 March 1925 were found guilty by the courts (kanunen mucrim olan bazi muteneffizan) and who used the mask of religion to conceal the interests of landlords, feudal tribal leaders and other "reactionaries".[165] 
Relations with the Russian SFSR/Soviet Union
See also: Russia–Turkey relations § Turkey and the Soviet Union
 

During a reception at the USSR Embassy in Ankara, on 7 November 1927
 

Exchanges on the concept of a Balkan Federation during the visit of Voroshilov, a vision of Kemal's which was never achieved
In his message to Vladimir Lenin, the Bolshevik leader and head of the Russian SFSR's government, dated 26 April 1920, Kemal promised to coordinate his military operations with the Bolsheviks' "fight against imperialist governments" and requested 5 million lira in gold as well as armaments "as first aid" to his forces.[166] In 1920 alone, the Lenin government supplied the Kemalists with 6,000 rifles, over 5 million rifle cartridges, 17,600 projectiles as well as 200.6 kg of gold bullion; in the subsequent 2 years the amount of aid increased.[167] 
In March 1921, the GNA representatives in Moscow signed the "Friendship and Brotherhood" Treaty with Soviet Russia, which was a major diplomatic breakthrough for the Kemalists. The Treaty of Moscow, followed by the identical Treaty of Kars in October the same year, gave Turkey a favourable settlement of its north-eastern frontier at the expense of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, then nominally an independent state. 
Relations between the two countries were friendly, but were based on the fact that they were fighting against a common enemy: Britain and the West.[168] In 1920, Kemal toyed with the idea of using a state-controlled Turkish Communist Party to forestall the perceived spread of communist ideas in the country and gain access to the Comintern's financing. 
"Friendship with Russia," said Mustafa Kemal, "is not to adopt their ideology of communism for Turkey."[168] He declared: "Communism is a social issue. Social conditions, religion, and national traditions of our country confirm the opinion that Russian Communism is not applicable in Turkey."[169] In a speech on 1 November 1924 he said: "Our amicable relations with our old friend the Soviet Russian Republic are developing and progressing every day. As in past our Republican Government regards genuine and extensive good relations with Soviet Russia as the keystone of our foreign policy."[168] 
After the Turks, on 16 December 1925, withdrew their delegation from Geneva, thus leaving the League of Nations Council to grant a mandate for the Mosul region to Britain without their consent, Kemal countered[170] by concluding a non-aggression pact with the USSR on 17 December.[171] In 1935, the pact was prolonged for another 10 years.[172] 
In 1933, the Soviet War minister Kliment Voroshilov visited Turkey and attended the tenth year celebrations of the Republic.[173] Kemal explained his position regarding the realization of his plan for a Balkan Federation economically uniting Turkey, Greece, Romania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria.[173] 
During the second half of the 1930s, Mustafa Kemal tried to establish a closer relationship with Britain and other major western powers, which caused displeasure on the part of the Soviets. The second edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia (Volume 20, 1953) was unequivocally critical of Kemal's policies in the last years of his rule, calling his domestic policies "anti-popular" and his foreign course as aimed at rapprochement with the "imperialist powers."[174] 
Turkish-Greek alliance
 

President Mustafa Kemal (center) hosting the Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos (at the left) in Ankara, October 1932
The post-war leader of Greece, Eleftherios Venizelos, was also determined to establish normal relations between the two states. The war had devastated Western Anatolia, and the financial burden of Ottoman Muslim refugees from Greece blocked rapprochement. Venizelos moved forward with the agreement despite accusations of conceding too much on the issues of the naval armaments, and the properties of the Ottoman Greeks from Turkey according to the Treaty of Lausanne.[175] Kemal resisted the pressures of historic enmities or atrocity-mongering between the societies. In spite of Turkish animosity against the Greeks, Kemal showed acute sensitivity to even the slightest allusion to these tensions; at one point, he ordered the removal of a painting showing a Turkish soldier plunging his bayonet to a Greek soldier by stating, "What a revolting scene!".[176] 
Ultimately, many Greeks consider the reconciliation with Turkey among the greatest foreign policy achievements of Venizelos' final term as Prime Minister. Greece renounced all its claims over Turkish territory and the two sides concluded an agreement on 30 April 1930. On 25 October, Venizelos visited Turkey, and signed a treaty of friendship.[177] Venizelos even forwarded Atatürk's name for the 1934 Nobel Peace Prize,[15] Even after his fall from power, Greco-Turkish relations remained cordial. Indeed, Venizelos' successor Panagis Tsaldaris came to visit Atatürk in September 1933 and signed a more comprehensive agreement called the Entente Cordiale between Greece and Turkey, which was a stepping stone for the Balkan Pact. 
Greek Premier Ioannis Metaxas said of Atatürk and the Turkish-Greek alliance, that "...Greece, which has the highest estimation of the renowned leader, heroic soldier, and enlightened creator of Turkey. We will never forget that President Atatürk was the true founder of the Turkish-Greek alliance based on a framework of common ideals and peaceful cooperation. He developed ties of friendship between the two nations which it would be unthinkable to dissolve. Greece will guard its fervent memories of this great man, who determined an unalterable future path for the noble Turkish nation." 
Neighbours to the east
 

Atatürk (right) with Reza Shah Pahlavi (left) of Iran, during the Shah's visit to Turkey
From 1919, Afghanistan was in the midst of a reformation period under Amanullah Khan. Afghan Foreign Minister Mahmud Tarzi was a follower of Mustafa Kemal's domestic policy. He encouraged Amanullah Khan in social and political reform but urged that reforms should build upon the basis of a strong government. During the late 1920s, Anglo-Afghan relations soured over British fears of an Afghan-Soviet friendship. On 20 May 1928, Anglo-Afghan politics gained a positive perspective, when Amanullah Khan and the Queen were received by Mustafa Kemal in Constantinople. This meeting was followed by a Turkey-Afghanistan Friendship and Cooperation pact on 22 May 1928. Mustafa Kemal supported Afghanistan's integration into international organizations. In 1934, Afghanistan's relations with the international community gained a huge boost when it joined the League of Nations.[178] In 1937, King Zahir Shah became a signatory of the Treaty of Saadabad. Mahmud Tarzi received Mustafa Kemal's personal support until he died on 22 November 1933 in Istanbul. 
 

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk with King Amanullah Khan of Afghanistan in Ankara, 1928. King Amanullah attempted to emulate many of Atatürk's reforms in Afghanistan, but was overthrown.
Mustafa Kemal and Reza Shah had a common approach regarding British imperialism and its influence in their region, creating a slow but continuous rapprochement between Ankara and Tehran. Both governments sent diplomatic missions and messages of friendship to each other during the Turkish War of Independence.[179] The policy of the Ankara government in this period was to give moral support in order to assure Iranian independence and territorial integrity.[180] The relations were strained after the abolishment of the Caliphate. Iran's Shi'a clergy did not accept Kemal's position. Iranian religious power centres perceived the real motive behind Atatürk's reforms was to undermine the power of the clergy.[180] By the mid-1930s, Reza Shah's efforts had upset the clergy throughout Iran, thus widening the gap between religion and government.[181] Mustafa Kemal feared the occupation and dismemberment of Iran as a multi-ethnic/multi-tribal society by Russia or Great Britain.[180] Like Mustafa Kemal, Reza Shah wanted to secure Iran's borders. Reza Shah visited him in 1934. In 1935, the draft of what would become the Treaty of Saadabad was paragraphed in Geneva, but the signing of it was delayed because of the border dispute between Iran and Iraq. Iran challenged the validity of both the Treaty of Erzerum and the Constantinople Protocol in 1934. 
 

Atatürk with King Faisal I of Iraq in Ankara, 1931
On 8 July 1937, Turkey, Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan signed the Saadabad Pact at Tehran. The signatories undertook to preserve their common frontiers, to consult together in all matters of common interest and to commit no aggression against one another's territory. The treaty united the Afghan king's call for greater Oriental-Middle Eastern cooperation, Reza Shah's goal in securing relations with Turkey that would help Iran free itself from Soviet and British influence, and Mustafa Kemal's foreign policy of securing stability in the region. The immediate outcome was to deter Mussolini from adventures in the region.[182] 
Turkish Straits
 

Atatürk with King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom in Istanbul, 4 September 1936
On 24 July 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne included the Lausanne Straits Agreement. The Lausanne Straits Agreement stated that the Dardanelles should remain open to all commercial vessels: seizure of foreign military vessels was subject to certain limitations during peacetime, and, even as a neutral state, Turkey could not limit any military passage during wartime. The Lausanne Straits Agreement stated that the waterway was to be demilitarized, and its management left to the Straits Commission. The demilitarized zone heavily restricted Turkey's domination and sovereignty over the Straits. The defence of Constantinople was impossible without having the sovereignty over the water that passed through it. 
In March 1936, Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland gave Mustafa Kemal the opportunity to resume full control over the Straits. "The situation in Europe", he declared "is highly appropriate for such a move. We shall certainly achieve it".[183] Tevfik Rüstü Aras, who was the foreign minister, initiated a move to revise the Straits' regime. Aras claimed that he was directed by the President, rather than his Prime Minister, Ismet Inönü. Inönü was worried about harming relations with Britain, France, and Balkan neighbors over the Straits. However, the signatories agreed to join the conference, since unlimited military passage had become unfavourable to Turkey with the changes in world politics. Mustafa Kemal demanded that the members of the Turkish Foreign Office devise a solution that would transfer full control over the waterway to Turkey. 
On 20 July 1936, the Montreux Convention was signed, with the participation of Bulgaria, Great Britain, Australia, France, Japan, Romania, the Soviet Union, Turkey, Yugoslavia and Greece. It became the primary instrument governing the passage of commercial and war vessels through the Dardanelles Strait. It was ratified by the GNAT on 31 July 1936. It went into effect on 9 November 1936, and is still valid today. 
Balkan Pact
 

During the visit of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia in 1931
Until the early 1930s, Turkey followed a modern neutral foreign policy with the West by developing joint friendship and neutrality agreements. These bilateral agreements were aligned with Mustafa Kemal's worldview. By the end of 1925, Turkey had signed fifteen joint agreements with Western states. 
In the early 1930s, changes and developments in world politics required Turkey to make multilateral agreements to improve its security. Mustafa Kemal strongly believed that a close cooperation between the Balkan states based on the principle of equality would have an important effect on European politics. These states had been ruled by the Ottoman Empire for centuries, and had formed a powerful force. While the origins of the Balkan agreement may date back as far as 1925, the Balkan Pact came to being in the mid-1930s. Several important developments in the Balkan Peninsula and in Europe helped the original idea to materialize, such as improvements in the Turkish-Greek alliance and the rapprochement between Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. The most important factor in driving Turkish foreign policy from the mid-1930s onwards was the fear of Italy. Benito Mussolini had frequently proclaimed his intention to make the entire Mediterranean Mare Nostrum. Both the Turks and the various Balkan states felt threatened by Italian ambitions. 
The Balkan Pact was negotiated by Mustafa Kemal with Greece, Romania, and Yugoslavia. This mutual-defence agreement intended to guarantee the signatories' territorial integrity and political independence against attack by another Balkan state such as Bulgaria or Albania. It countered the increasingly aggressive foreign policy of fascist Italy and the effect of a potential Bulgarian alignment with Nazi Germany. Mustafa Kemal thought of the Balkan Pact as a medium of balance in the relations with the European countries.[184] He was particularly anxious to establish a region of security and alliances in the west of Turkey and in Balkan Europe, which would extend as far as Dobruja.[185] 
 

Atatürk with Greek Prime Minister Ioannis Metaxas (second from right) at the Balkan Pact summit in Ankara, March 1938
The Balkan Pact provided for regular military and diplomatic consultations. It was regarded as a significant step forward in consolidating the free world's position in southeast Europe, although it contained no specific military commitments. The importance of the agreement was best displayed in the message which Atatürk sent to the Greek Premier, Ioannis Metaxas: 
The borders of the allies in the Balkan Pact are a single border. Those who covet this border will encounter the burning beams of the sun. I recommend avoiding this. The forces that defend our borders are a single and inseparable force.[186] 
It was signed by GNA on 28 February The Greek and Yugoslav Parliaments ratified the agreement a few days after. The unanimously ratified Balkan pact became a reality on 18 May 1935 and lasted until 1940. 
The Balkan Pact turned out to be ineffective for reasons that were beyond Atatürk's control. What he wanted to prevent with the Balkan Pact was realized by Bulgaria's attempt to put the Dobruja issue into the agenda after a series of international events ending with the Italian invasion of Albania on 7 April 1939. These conflicts spread rapidly, triggering World War II. The goal of Atatürk, to protect southeast Europe, failed with the dissolution of the pact. The only state which arose intact after the war was Atatürk's Republic of Turkey. 
Issue of Hatay

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 

Telegram sent by Atatürk after the local legislative assembly accepted his proposal for the Hatay State's flag
Turkish Prime-Minister Ismet Inönü was very conscious of foreign policy issues. During the second half of the 1930s, Atatürk tried to form a closer relationship with Britain. The risks of this policy change put the two men at odds. The Hatay issue and the Lyon agreement were two important developments in foreign policy that played a significant role in the severing of relations between Atatürk and Inönü. 
In 1936, Atatürk raised the "Issue of Hatay" at the League of Nations. Hatay was based on the old administrative unit of the Ottoman Empire called the Sanjak of Alexandretta. On behalf of the League of Nations, the representatives of France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium and Turkey prepared a constitution for Hatay, which established it as an autonomous sanjak within Syria. Despite some inter-ethnic violence, in the midst of 1938 an election was conducted by the local legislative assembly. The cities of Antakya (Antioch) and Iskenderun (Alexandretta) joined Turkey in 1939. 
Economic policies
For conceptual analysis, see Economic reforms
Mustafa Kemal instigated economic policies to develop small and large scale businesses, but also to create social strata (industrial bourgeoisie along with the peasantry of Anatolia) that were virtually non-existent during the Ottoman Empire. The primary problem faced by the politics of his period was the lag in the development of political institutions and social classes which would steer such social and economic changes.[187] Mustafa Kemal's vision regarding early Turkish economic policy was apparent during the Izmir Economic Congress of 1923 which was established before the signing of the Lausanne Treaty. The initial choices of Mustafa Kemal's economic policies reflected the realities of his period. After World War I, due to the lack of any real potential investors to open private sector factories and develop industrial production, Kemal established many state-owned factories for agriculture, machinery, and textile industries. 
State intervention, 1923–1929

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
 

Atatürk and Celâl Bayar visiting the Sümerbank Nazilli Cotton Factory, which was established as a part of the cotton-related industry
Mustafa Kemal and Ismet Inönü's pursuit of state-controlled economical policies was guided by a national vision; their goal was to knit the country together, eliminate the foreign control of the economy, and improve communications within Turkey. Resources were channeled away from Constantinople, a trading port with international foreign enterprises, in favor of other, less developed cities, in order to establish a more balanced development throughout the country.[188] 
For Mustafa Kemal, as for his supporters, tobacco remained wedded to his policy in the pursuit of economic independence. Turkish tobacco was an important industrial crop, while its cultivation and manufacture had been French monopolies under capitulations of the Ottoman Empire. The tobacco and cigarette trade was controlled by two French companies: the "Regie Company" and "Narquileh Tobacco".[189] The Ottoman Empire had given the tobacco monopoly to the Ottoman Bank as a limited company under the "Council of the Public Debt". Regie, as part of the Council of the Public Debt, had control over production, storing, and distribution (including export) with an unchallenged price control. Consequently, Turkish farmers were dependent on the company for their livelihood.[190] In 1925, this company was taken over by the state and named "Tekel". The control of tobacco was the biggest achievement of the Kemalist political machinery's "nationalization" of the economy for a country that did not produce oil. They accompanied this achievement with the development of the cotton industry, which peaked during the early 1930s. Cotton was the second biggest industrial crop in Turkey at the time. 
In 1924, with the initiative of Mustafa Kemal, the first Turkish bank Is Bankasi was established. He was the first member of Is Bankasi. The bank's creation was a response to the growing need for a truly national establishment and the birth of a banking system which was capable of backing up economic activities, managing funds accumulated as a result of policies providing savings incentives, and, where necessary, extending resources which could trigger industrial impetus. 
In 1927, Turkish State Railways was established. Because Mustafa Kemal considered the development of a national rail network as another important step in industrialization, it was given high priority. This institution developed an extensive railway network in a very short time. In 1927, Kemal also ordered the integration of road construction goals into development plans. Prior to this, the road network had consisted of 13,885 km of ruined surface roads, 4,450 km of stabilized roads, and 94 bridges. In 1935, a new entity was established under the government called "Sose ve Köprüler Reisligi" which would drive development of new roads after World War II. However, in 1937, the 22,000 km of roads in Turkey augmented the railways. 
The national group[clarification needed], which had Mustafa Kemal as the leader, developed many projects within the first decade of the republic. However, the Turkish economy was still largely agrarian, with primitive tools and methods; roads and transportation facilities were far from sufficient and management of the economy was inefficient. The Great Depression brought many changes to this picture. 
Great Depression, 1929–1931
 

Atatürk supported large-scale government subsidized industrial complexes, such as Sümerbank, increasingly after the Great Depression.
The young republic, like the rest of the world, found itself in a deep economic crisis during the Great Depression. Mustafa Kemal reacted to conditions of this period by moving toward integrated economic policies, and establishing a central bank to control exchange rates. However, Turkey could not finance essential imports; its currency was shunned and zealous revenue officials seized the meagre possessions of peasants who could not pay their taxes.[188] 
In 1929, Mustafa Kemal signed a treaty that resulted in the restructuring of the nation's debt with the Ottoman Public Debt Administration. He did not fault the Ottoman debt. He had to deal with the turbulent economic issues of the Great Depression along with the payment of the high debt known as the Ottoman public debt. Until the early 1930s, Turkish private business could not acquire exchange credits. It was impossible to integrate the Turkish economy without a solution to this problem. This increased the credibility of the new Republic. 
In 1931, Mustafa Kemal's intention to establish the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey was realized. The bank's primary purpose was to have control over the exchange rate, and Ottoman Bank's role during its initial years as a central bank was phased out. Later specialized banks such as the Sümerbank (1932) and the Etibank (1935) were founded. 
From the political economy perspective, Mustafa Kemal had to face the same problems which all countries faced: political upheaval. The establishment of a new party with a different economic perspective was needed; he asked Ali Fethi Okyar to fulfil. The Liberal Republican Party (August 1930) came out with a liberal program and proposed that state monopolies should be ended, foreign capital should be attracted, and that state investment should be curtailed. Mustafa Kemal supported Inönü's point of view: "it is impossible to attract foreign capital for essential development." In 1931, he proclaimed: "In the economic area ...the programme of the party is statism."[191] However, the effect of free republicans was felt strongly and state intervention became more moderate, more akin to a form of state capitalism. One of his radical left-wing supporters, Yakup Kadri Karaosmanoglu from the Kadro (The Cadre) movement, claimed that Mustafa Kemal found a third way between capitalism and socialism.[192] 
Liberalization and planned growth, 1931–1939
 

Atatürk at the Etimesgut Airport in Ankara, built by the Turkish Aircraft Association. His famous quote, "the future is in the skies", is embossed today on the airport's façade.
 

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and Celal Bayar (left) on the yacht Ertugrul in 1937
The first (1929–1933) and second five-year economic plans were performed under the supervision of Mustafa Kemal. The first five-year economic plan promoted consumer substitution industries. However, these economic plans changed drastically with the death of Kemal and the rise of World War II. Subsequent governments took measures that harmed the economic productivity of Turkey in various ways.[193] The achievements of the 1930s were credited to early (1920s) implementation of the economic system based on the national policies of Mustafa Kemal and his team.[194] 
In 1931, Mustafa Kemal watched the first national aircraft, MMV-1, develop. He realized the important role of aviation. In his words, "the future lies in the skies".[195] Turkish Aeronautical Association was founded on 16 February 1925 by his directive.[196] He ordered the establishment of the Turkish Aircraft Association Lottery. Instead of the traditional raffle prizes, this new lottery paid money prizes. Most of the lottery income was used to establish a new factory and fund aviation projects. Mustafa Kemal did not live to see the flight of the first Turkish military aircraft built at that factory. Operational American Curtiss Hawk fighters were being produced soon after his death and before the onset of World War II. 
In 1932, liberal economist Celal Bayar became the Minister of Economy at Mustafa Kemal's request and served until 1937.[197] During this period, the country moved toward a mixed economy with its first private initiatives. Textile, sugar, paper and steel factories (financed by a loan from Britain) were the private sectors of the period. Besides these government owned power plants, banks, and insurance companies were established. 
 

Atatürk in 1937
In 1935, the first Turkish cotton print factory "Nazilli Calico print factory" opened. Cotton planting was promoted to furnish raw material for future factory settlements, part of the industrialization process.[198] Nazilli became a major center beginning with the establishment of cotton mills and was followed by a calico print factory by 1935.[199][200] 
In 1936 Nuri Demirag established the first Turkish aircraft factory in the Besiktas district of Istanbul.[201] The first Turkish airplanes, Nu D.36 and Nu D.38, were produced in this factory.[201] 
On 25 October 1937, Atatürk appointed Celal Bayar as the prime minister of the 9th government. Integrated economic policies reached their peak with the signing of the 1939 Treaty with Britain and France.[193] This signaled a turning point in Turkish history.[193] It was the first step towards an alliance with the "West".[193] Celal Bayar served as prime minister until Atatürk's death. The differences of opinion between Ismet Inönü (state control) and Celal Bayar (liberal) came to the forefront after Inönü became president in 1938. On 25 January 1939, Prime Minister Bayar resigned. 
Mustafa Kemal supported the establishment of the automobile industry. He wanted it to become a center in the region. The motto of the Turkish automobile association was: "The Turkish driver is a man of the most exquisite sensitivities."[202] 
During 1935, Turkey was becoming an industrial society on the Western European model set out by Atatürk.[203] At the time of his death, most regions of Turkey had viable micro-economic stability and some macro economic stability. These signs of sound economic policies were marked by the first-ever emergence of local banks. However, the gap between Mustafa Kemal's goals and the achievements of the socio-political structure of the country was not closed.[203] 
Personal life
See also: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's personal life
 

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his wife Latife Usakizâde during a trip to Bursa, 1923
Mustafa Kemal's name is associated with four women: Eleni Karinte, Fikriye Hanim, Dimitrina Kovacheva[204] and Latife Usakligil. Little is known of Mustafa Kemal's relationship with Eleni, who fell in love with him while he was a student in Bitola, Macedonia (Manastir in Turkish) but the relationship inspired a play by the Macedonian writer Dejan Dukovski, later filmed by Aleksandar Popovski.[205] Fikriye was a nominal cousin of Mustafa Kemal, though not related by blood (his stepfather Ragip Bey's sister's daughter). Fikriye grew passionately attached to Mustafa Kemal; the full extent of his feelings for her is unclear but it is certain that they became very close after Fikriye divorced her Egyptian husband and returned to Istanbul. During the War of Independence, she lived with him in Çankaya, Ankara as his personal assistant. However, after the Turkish army entered Izmir in 1922, Mustafa Kemal met Latife while staying at the house of her father, the shipping magnate Muammer Usakizade (later Usakli). Latife fell in love with Mustafa Kemal; again the extent to which this was reciprocated is unknown, but he was certainly impressed by Latife's intellect: she was a graduate of the Sorbonne and was studying English in London when the war broke out. On 29 January 1923, they were married. Latife was jealous of Fikriye and demanded that she leave the house in Çankaya; Fikriye was devastated and immediately left in a carriage. According to official accounts, she shot herself with a pistol Mustafa Kemal had given her as a present; however, it was rumoured that she was murdered.[206] The triangle of Mustafa Kemal, Fikriye and Latife became the subject of a manuscript by his close friend, Salih Bozok which remained unpublished until 2005.[207] Latife was briefly and literally the face of the new Turkish woman, appearing in public in Western clothing with her husband.[208] However, their marriage was not happy; after frequent arguments they were divorced on 5 August 1925.[209] 
During his lifetime, Atatürk adopted thirteen children: a boy and twelve girls. Of these, the most famous is Sabiha Gökçen, Turkey's first female pilot and the world's first female fighter pilot.[210] 
Illness and death
See also: Death and state funeral of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
 

A view from the state funeral of Atatürk, November 1938
During 1937, indications that Atatürk's health was worsening started to appear. In early 1938, while he was on a trip to Yalova, he suffered from a serious illness. He went to Istanbul for treatment, where he was diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver. During his stay in Istanbul, he made an effort to keep up with his regular lifestyle for a while. He died on 10 November 1938, at the age of 57, in the Dolmabahçe Palace, where he spent his last days.[211] The clock in the bedroom where he died is still set to the time of his death, 9:05 in the morning. 
Atatürk's funeral called forth both sorrow and pride in Turkey, and 17 countries sent special representatives, while nine contributed armed detachments to the cortège.[156] Mustafa Kemal's remains were originally laid to rest in the Ethnography Museum of Ankara, and transferred on 10 November 1953, 15 years after his death in a 42-ton sarcophagus, to a mausoleum that overlooks Ankara,[212] Anitkabir. 
In his will, Atatürk donated all of his possessions to the Republican People's Party, providing that the yearly interest of his funds would be used to look after his sister Makbule and his adopted children, and fund the higher education of the children of Ismet Inönü. The remainder of this yearly interest was willed to the Turkish Language Association and the Turkish Historical Society. 


Anitkabir, the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, in Ankara, Turkey
Legacy
Turkey
 

The Republic Monument, crafted by the renowned Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica, is located at the Taksim Square in Istanbul.
 

The Victory Monument was crafted by Austrian sculptor Heinrich Krippel in 1925 and was erected in 1927 at Ulus Square in Ankara.
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk is commemorated by many memorials throughout Turkey, such as the Atatürk International Airport in Istanbul, the Atatürk Bridge over the Golden Horn (Haliç), the Atatürk Dam, and Atatürk Stadium. Atatürk statues have been erected in all Turkish cities by Turkish Government, and most towns have their own memorial to him. His face and name are seen and heard everywhere in Turkey; his portrait can be seen in public buildings, in schools, on all Turkish lira banknotes, and in the homes of many Turkish families.[213] At the exact time of his death, on every 10 November, at 09:05 am, most vehicles and people in the country's streets pause for one minute in remembrance.[214] 
In 1951, the Democrat Party-controlled Turkish parliament led by Prime Minister Adnan Menderes (despite being the conservative opposition to Atatürk's own Republican People's Party) issued a law (5816) outlawing insults to his memory (Turkish: hatirasina alenen hakaret) or destruction of objects representing him.[215] The demarcation between a criticism and an insult was defined as a political argument and the Minister of Justice (a political position) was assigned in Article 5 to execute the law rather than the public prosecutor. A government website was created to denounce the websites that violate this law.[216] 
In 2007, YouTube, Geocities, and several blogger webpages were blocked by a Turkish court due to the violation of this law.[217] The YouTube ban in the country lasted for 30 months, in retaliation for four videos on Atatürk. These videos alleged that Atatürk was a Freemason, and was a homosexual, citing a book printed in Belgium on this subject that is currently banned in Turkey. In the last week of October 2010, a German company, following a request from the Turkish Internet Board, exploited YouTube automatic copyright-enforcement mechanism to take down the videos. On 30 October, shortly after the removal, a court lifted the ban. But a few days later, Google concluded that the videos did not infringe copyright and restored them on YouTube.[218] 
In 2010, the French-based NGO Reporters Without Borders objected to the Turkish laws to protect the memory of Kemal Atatürk, saying they are in contradiction with the current European Union standards of freedom of speech in news media.[219] 
Worldwide

John F. Kennedy's speech concerning Atatürk


Menu




0:00

November 1963

Problems playing this file? See media help.
 

Kemal Atatürk Memorial in Canberra, Australia
 

Monument to Atatürk on Paseo de la Reforma in Mexico City
 

A postcard depicting Atatürk as a Muslim hero, with Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi (left) and Saladin (right)
In 1981, the centennial of Atatürk's birth, his memory was honoured by the United Nations and UNESCO, which declared it The Atatürk Year in the World and adopted the Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial.[13][14] The Atatürk Memorial in Wellington, New Zealand (which also serves as a memorial to the ANZAC troops who died at Gallipoli); the Atatürk Memorial in the place of honour on Anzac Parade in Canberra, Australia; the Atatürk Forest in Israel; and the Atatürk Square in Rome, Italy, are a few examples. He has roads named after him in several countries, like the Kemal Atatürk Marg in New Delhi, India, Kemal Atatürk Avenue in Dhaka, Bangladesh, the Atatürk Avenue in the heart of Islamabad, Pakistan, the Atatürk Road in the southern city of Larkana in Sindh province of Pakistan, which Atatürk visited in 1923, Mustafá Kemal Atatürk street in the Naco district of Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, and the street and memorial Atatürk in the Amsterdam-Noord borough of Amsterdam, Netherlands. The entrance to Princess Royal Harbour in Albany, Western Australia is named Atatürk Channel. There are many statues and streets named after Atatürk in Northern Cyprus. 
Despite his radical secular reforms, Atatürk remained broadly popular in the Muslim world.[220] He is remembered for being the creator of a new, fully independent Muslim country at a time of encroachment by Christian powers, and for having prevailed in a struggle against Western imperialism.[220] When he died, the All-India Muslim League eulogised him as a "truly great personality in the Islamic world, a great general and a great statesman", declaring that his memory would "inspire Muslims all over the world with courage, perseverance and manliness".[220] 
Awards and decorations

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: List of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's awards
Ottoman Empire and Republic of Turkey
 

Statue of Atatürk in Ankara
 Ottoman Empire: Fifth Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Abdul Hamid II, (25 December 1906)
 Ottoman Empire: Silver Imtiyaz Medal awarded by Mehmed V, (30 April 1915)
 Ottoman Empire: Silver Liakat Medal awarded by Mehmed V, (1 September 1915)
 Ottoman Empire: Golden Liakat Medal awarded by Mehmed V, (17 January 1916)
 Ottoman Empire: Second Class Knight Order of Osmanieh awarded by Mehmed V, (1 February 1916)
 Ottoman Empire: Second Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Mehmed V, (12 December 1916)
 Ottoman Empire: Golden Imtiyaz Medal awarded by Mehmed V, (23 September 1917)
 Ottoman Empire: First Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Mehmed V, (16 December 1917)
 Ottoman Empire: Gallipoli Star awarded by Mehmed VI, (11 May 1918)
 Turkey: Medal of Independence awarded by Grand National Assembly of Turkey, (21 November 1923)
 Turkey: Murassa Order awarded by Turkish Aeronautical Association (20 May 1925)
Foreign honours
 Kingdom of Bulgaria: Commander Grand Cross Order of Saint Alexander awarded by Ferdinand I, (1915)
 German Empire: Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II, (1915)
 Austria-Hungary: Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Franz Joseph I, (1916)
 Austria-Hungary: 3rd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Franz Joseph I, (27 July 1916)
 German Empire: 1st Class Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II,(1917)
 German Empire: 2nd Class Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II, (9 September 1917)
 Austria-Hungary: 2nd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Charles I,
 Kingdom of Prussia: 1st Class Order of the Crown Prussia awarded by Wilhelm II, (1918)
 Kingdom of Afghanistan: Alüyülala Order of Kingdom of Afghanistan awarded by Amanullah Khan, (27 March 1923)
See also

Turkey portal

Biography portal

Politics portal
Ileri newspaper
Kemalism
List of covers of Time magazine (1920s) – 24 March 1923
Pan-Turkism
Turkish War of Independence 
List of high-ranking commanders of the Turkish War of Independence
Timeline of the Turkish War of Independence
Young Turks
Notes
Jump up 
^ Zürcher, Turkey : a modern history, 142 
Jump up 
^ Mastering Modern World History by Norman Lowe, second edition 
Jump up 
^ Türkiye'nin 75 yili , Tempo Yayincilik, Istanbul, 1998, p.48,59,250 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Sofos, Umut Özkirimli & Spyros A. (2008). Tormented by history: nationalism in Greece and Turkey. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 167. ISBN 9780231700528. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Toktas, Sule (2005). "Citizenship and Minorities: A Historical Overview of Turkey's Jewish Minority". Journal of Historical Sociology. 18 (4). Retrieved 7 January 2013. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Jongerden, edited by Joost; Verheij, Jelle. Social relations in Ottoman Diyarbekir, 1870–1915. Leiden: Brill. p. 300. ISBN 978-90-04-22518-3. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Kieser, Hans-Lukas, ed. (2006). Turkey beyond nationalism: towards post-nationalist identities ([Online-Ausg.] ed.). London: Tauris. p. 45. ISBN 9781845111410. Retrieved 7 January 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Öktem, Kerem (2008). "The Nation's Imprint: Demographic Engineering and the Change of Toponymes in Republican Turkey". European Journal of Turkish Studies (7). Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Aslan, Senem. "Incoherent State: The Controversy over Kurdish Naming in Turkey". European Journal of Turkish Studies. Retrieved 16 January 2013. the Surname Law was meant to foster a sense of Turkishness within society and prohibited surnames that were related to foreign ethnicities and nations 
Jump up 
^ "Mustafa Kemal Atatürk'ün Nüfus Hüviyet Cüzdani. (24.11.1934)". www.isteataturk.com. Retrieved 26 June 2013. 
Jump up 
^ "Turkey commemorates Atatürk on 78th anniversary of his passing". Hürriyet Daily News. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
Jump up 
^ Jayapalan, N. (April 1999). Modern Asia Since 1900. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. ISBN 9788171567515. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b "ATATURK: Creator of Modern Turkey". www.columbia.edu. Retrieved 2017-11-22. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Landau, Jacob M. (1984). Atatürk and the Modernization of Turkey. BRILL. ISBN 9004070702. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Nobel Foundation. The Nomination Database for the Nobel Prize in Peace, 1901–1955.[1] 
Jump up 
^ Méropi Anastassiadou; Méropi Anastassiadou-Dumont (1997). Salonique, 1830–1912: une ville ottomane à l'âge des Réformes. BRILL. p. 71. ISBN 90-04-10798-3. 
Jump up 
^ Cemal Çelebi Granda (2007). Cemal Granda anlatiyor. Pal Medya ve Organizasyon. ISBN 978-9944-203-01-2.[page needed] 
Jump up 
^ Andrew Mango Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey, Overlook Press, 2002, ISBN 978-1-58567-334-6, p. 25, p.27ff. – "Feyzullah's family is said to have come from the country near Vodina (now Edhessa in western Greek Macedonia). The surname Sofuzade, meaning 'son of a pious man', suggests that the ancestors of Zübeyde and Ali Riza had a similar background. Cemil Bozok, son of Salih Bozok, who was a distant cousin of Atatürk and, later, his ADC, claims to have been related to both Ali Riza's and Zübeyde's families. This would mean that the families of Atatürk's parents were interrelated. Cemil Bozok also notes that his paternal grandfather, Safer Efendi, was of Albanian origin. This may have a bearing on the vexed question of Atatürk's ethnic origin. Atatürk's parents and relatives all used Turkish as their mother tongue. This suggests that some at least of their ancestors had originally come from Turkey, since local Muslims of Albanian and Slav origin who had no ethnic connection with Turkey spoke Albanian, Serbo-Croat or Bulgarian, at least so long as they remained in their native land. But in looks Atatürk resembled local Albanians and Slavs.[...] But there is no evidence that either Ali Riza or Zübeyde was descended from such Turkish nomads." page 28; "It is much more likely that Atatürk inherited his looks from his Balkan ancestors.[...] But Albanians and Slavs are likely to have figured among his ancestors." 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Andrew, Atatürk: the biography of the founder of modern Turkey, (Overlook TP, 2002), p. 27. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Jackh, Ernest, The Rising Crescent, (Goemaere Press, 2007), p. 31, Turkish mother and Albanian father 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Isaac Frederick Marcosson, Turbulent Years, Ayer Publishing, 1969, p. 144. 
Jump up 
^ Falih Rifki Atay, Çankaya: Atatürk'ün dogumundan ölümüne kadar, Istanbul: Betas, 1984, p. 17. (in Turkish) 
Jump up 
^ Vamik D. Volkan & Norman Itzkowitz, Ölümsüz Atatürk (Immortal Atatürk), Baglam Yayinlari, 1998, ISBN 975-7696-97-8, p. 37, dipnote no. 6 (Atay, 1980, s. 17) 
Jump up 
^ Cunbur, Müjgân. Türk dünyasi edebiyatçilari ansiklopedisi, 2. cilt (2004), Atatürk Kültür Merkezi Baskanligi: "Babasi Ali Riza Efendi (dog. 1839), annesi Zübeyde Hanimdir, baba dedesi Hafiz Ahmet Efendi, 14–15. yy.da Anadolu'dan göç ederek Makedonya'ya yerlesen Kocacik Yörüklerindendir." 
Jump up 
^ Kartal, Numan. Atatürk ve Kocacik Türkleri (2002), T.C. Kültür Bakanligi: "Aile Selânik'e Manastir ilinin Debrei Bâlâ sancagina bagli Kocacik bucagindan gelmisti. Ali Riza Efendi'nin dogum yeri olan Kocacik bucagi halki da Anadolu'dan gitme ve tamamiyla Türk, Müslüman Oguzlarin Türkmen boylarindandirlar." 
Jump up 
^ Dinamo, Hasan Izzettin.Kutsal isyan: Millî Kurtulus savasi'nin gerçek hikâyesi, 2. cilt (1986), Tekin Yayinevi. 
Jump up 
^ "Mustafa Kemal Ataturk – memorial museum in village Kodzadzik (???????) in Municipality Centar Zupa (?????? ????)". Macedonia Travel Blog. May 24, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2018. 
Jump up 
^ Sevket Süreyya Aydemir, Tek Adam: Mustafa Kemal, Birinci Cilt (1st vol.): 1881–1919, 14th ed., Remzi Kitabevi, 1997, ISBN 975-14-0212-3, p. 31. (in Turkish) 
Jump up 
^ Afet Inan, Atatürk hakkinda hâtiralar ve belgeler, Türk Tarih Kurumu Basimevi, 1959, p. 8. 
Jump up 
^ "Mustafa Kemal Atatürk". Turkish Embassy website. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 7 August 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Ali Fuat Cebesoy, Sinif arkadasim Atatürk: okul ve genç subaylik hâtiralari, Inkilâp ve Aka Kitabevleri, 1967, p. 6. Benim adim Mustafa. Senin adin da Musfata. Arada bir fark olmali, ne dersin, senin adinin sonuna bir de Kemal koyalim. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, p. 37. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d T. C. Genelkurmay Harp Tarihi Baskanligi Yayinlari, Türk Istiklâl Harbine Katilan Tümen ve Daha Üst Kademlerdeki Komutanlarin Biyografileri, Ankara: Genkurmay Baskanligi Basimevi, 1972, p. 1. (in Turkish) 
Jump up 
^ Falih Rifki Atay, Çankaya: Atatürk'ün dogumundan ölümüne kadar, Istanbul: Betas, 1984, p. 29. (in Turkish) 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Falih Rifki Atay: Çankaya, Pozitif Yayinlari, Istanbil, 2004 ISBN 975-6461-05-5 
Jump up 
^ Mango, ibid, p. 37. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b T.C. Genelkurmay Baskanligi Yayinlari, ibid, p. 2. 
Jump up 
^ D.V.Mikusch: Zwichen Europe und Asien (translation Esat Mermi Erendor),Ikarus Yyin, Istanbul,1981 ISBN 978-605-5834-32-6 p.67 
Jump up 
^ Patrick Kinross: Rebirth of a Nation (translation Ayhan Tezel), Sander yayinlari, Istanbul,1972 p.68 
Jump up 
^ "1910, Albania broke a major uprising. Minister of War, Shefqet Mahmut Pasha, was personally involved in its printing. For this purpose decided to call his war headquarters Qemali Mustafa who was known as one of the generals prepared and laid him drafting the plan of operations. Mustafa at this time was in the Fifth Army Headquarters in Salonica". Albania.dyndns.org. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ "Mustafa Atatürk had assisted in the military operation in Albania in 1910". Zeriyt.com. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ "1912 | Aubrey Herbert: A Meeting with Isa Boletini". Albanianhistory.net. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. 
Jump up 
^ Enstehung und Ausbau der Königsdiktatur in Albanien, 1912–1939 Von Michael Schmidt-Neke 
Jump up 
^ "I remember well the meeting very interesting, I had casually with Mustafa Qemali in 1910, at the time, still a mere lieutenant". Albislam.com. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ KUJTIME nga: Eqrem Bej Vlora. Ekrem Bey Vlora, Lebenserinnerungen – Teilband II: 1912–1925 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Ana Britannica (1987) Vol. 2 (Ami – Avr): Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal. Page: 490. 
Jump up 
^ The History of the Italian-Turkish War, William Henry Beehler, page 96 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b The History of the Italian-Turkish War, William Henry Beehler, page 14 
Jump up 
^ Erik Goldstein (2005). Wars and Peace Treaties: 1816 to 1991. Routledge. p. 37. 
Jump up 
^ Richard C. Hall, The Balkan Wars 1912–1913: Prelude to the First World War, Routledge, 2002, p. 81. 
Jump up 
^ Edward J. Erickson, Defeat in Detail: The Ottoman Army in the Balkans, 1912–1913, Praeger, 2003, ISBN 0-275-97888-5, p. 255. 
Jump up 
^ "Kemal Atatürk". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Lengyel, They called him Atatürk, 68 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Patrick Kinross, Atatürk: The Rebirth of a Nation, 100 
Jump up 
^ "RAF History – Bomber Command 60th Anniversary". Raf.mod.uk. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. 
Jump up 
^ Patrick Kinross, Rebirth of a Nation (translation Ayhan Tezel), Sander yayinlari, Istanbul,1972 p.210 
Jump up 
^ Mustafa Kemal Pasha's speech on his arrival in Ankara in November 1919 
Jump up 
^ Andrew Mango, Atatürk, John Murray, 1999, ISBN 978-0-7195-6592-2, p. 214. 
Jump up 
^ Patrick Kinross: Rebirth of a Nation (translation Ayhan Tezel), Sander yayinlari, Istanbul,1972 p.293 
Jump up 
^ Ahmad, The Making of Modern Turkey, 50 
Jump up 
^ "Ataturk, Mustafa Kemal". Information about the Armenian Genocide. Armenian National Institute. Retrieved 21 May 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Documents on British Foreign Policy, vol. vii, p. 303. 
Jump up 
^ Kerr. The Lions of Marash, p. 196. 
Jump up 
^ Kinross, Patrick (1992). Atatürk: a biography of Mustafa Kemal, father of modern Turkey (1st Quill ed.). New York: Quill/Morrow. p. 235. ISBN 9780688112837. Retrieved 21 May 2013. In the whole operation some seven or eight thousand Armenians lost their lives, a massacre which, accompanied by others in the neighbouring areas, caused consternation in the capitals of Europe. 
Jump up 
^ Alayarian, Aida (2008). Consequences of Denial: The Armenian Genocide. Karnac Books. p. 18. ISBN 1780493835. 
Jump up 
^ ?. ???????. ??????. Moscow, 1995, p. 241. 
Jump up 
^ editorial staff. "A short history of AA". Anadolu Ajansi Genel Müdürlügü. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 1 January 2008. Ikdam newspaper dated 9 August 1921, reproducing the dispatches of AA dated 5 August and 6th, 1921, announced that Mustafa Kemal Pasha was promoted to Chief Commander 
Jump up 
^ Greco-Turkish wars, Britannica CD 99 
Jump up 
^ James, Edwin L. "Kemal Won't Insure Against Massacres," New York Times, 11 September 1922. 
Jump up 
^ Shaw, History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, 365 
Jump up 
^ "Turkey - Declaration of the Turkish republic | history - geography". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
Jump up 
^ "Republic Day in Turkey". www.timeanddate.com. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 394 
Jump up 
^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 226. ISBN 9781107507180. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 367 
Jump up 
^ Gerd Nonneman, Analyzing Middle East foreign policies and the relationship with Europe, Published 2005 Routledge, p. 204 ISBN 0-7146-8427-9 
Jump up 
^ M. Sükrü Hanioglu (9 May 2011). Atatürk: An Intellectual Biography. Princeton University Press. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-4008-3817-2. Retrieved 4 June 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Webster, The Turkey of Atatürk: social process in the Turkish reformation, 245 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 391–392 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Mango, Atatürk, 362 
Jump up 
^ Landau, Atatürk and the Modernization of Turkey, 252 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 501 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Koçak, Cemil (2005) "Parliament Membership during the Single-Party System in Turkey (1925–1945)", European Journal of Turkish Studies 
Jump up 
^ "Review: Revivalism, Shi'a Style". The National Interest. 3 January 2007. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 403 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Mango, Atatürk, 401 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d e Majid Khadduri (2006) War and peace in the law of Islam, The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd., ISBN 1-58477-695-1-page 290-291 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 404 
Jump up 
^ Eksi, Oktay (16 April 2008). "Paralardaki resimler". Hurriyet. Retrieved 24 April 2008. Ismet Pasa "kurumlasma" ile neyi kastettigini de söyle anlatti:
Biz Cumhuriyeti kurdugumuz zaman onu yasatip yasatamayacagimiz en büyük sorun idi. Çünkü Saltanatin ve Hilafetin lagvina karsi olanlarin sayisi çoktu ve hedefleri de Cumhuriyetti. Cumhuriyetin 10 yasina bastigini görmek o yüzden önemliydi. Nitekim büyük Atatürk'ün emriyle 10'uncu yil kutlamalari çok büyük bir bayram oldu. Biz de Cumhuriyetin ve devletin kurumlastigini göstermeye bundan sonra hep itina ettik... 
Jump up 
^ M. Sükrü Hanioglu (9 May 2011). Atatürk: An Intellectual Biography. Princeton University Press. p. 158. ISBN 978-1-4008-3817-2. Retrieved 5 June 2013. 
Jump up 
^ "1924". Ministry of Culture And Tourism. Retrieved 4 June 2013. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d e f g h i Wolf-Gazo, John Dewey in Turkey: An Educational Mission, 15–42. 
Jump up 
^ Republic of Turkey Ministry of National Education. "Atatürk's views on education". T.C. Government. Retrieved 20 November 2007. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Igdemir, Atatürk, 165–170 
Jump up 
^ Quoted in Atatürkism, Volume 1 (Istanbul: Office of the Chief of General Staff, 1982), 126. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 435 
Jump up 
^ Kastamonu Nutku 
Jump up 
^ Patrick Kinross, Atatürk: The Rebirth of a Nation, 397 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d e Mango, Atatürk, 418 
Jump up 
^ Weiker, Book Review of Zürcher's "Political Opposition in the Early Turkish Republic: The Progressive Republican Party, 1924–1925", 297–298 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 419 
Jump up 
^ Touraj Atabaki, Erik Jan Zürcher, 2004, Men of Order: authoritarian modernization under Atatürk and Reza Shah, I.B.Tauris, ISBN 1-86064-426-0, page 207 
Jump up 
^ [2] Archived 5 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Daisy Hilse Dwyer, (1990), "Law and Islam in the Middle East", page 77, ISBN 978-0-89789-151-6 
Jump up 
^ Atillasoy, Atatürk : The First President and Founder of the Turkish Republic, 13. 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 164 
Jump up 
^ Tüfekçi, Universality of Atatürk's philosophy 
Jump up 
^ Kinross, Atatürk: The Rebirth of a Nation, p. 343 
Jump up 
^ Atillasoy, Atatürk : first president and founder of the Turkish Republic, 15 
Jump up 
^ Dündar, Can (25 April 2005). "Türkes, Atatürk'ün imzasini hatirlatti". Milliyet (in Turkish). Atatürk'ün imzasini bir Ermeni güzel yazi hocasinin çizdigini duymus muydun? 
Jump up 
^ Landau, Atatürk and the Modernization of Turkey, 190. 
Jump up 
^ Kayadibi, Fahri (2006). "Atatürk Döneminde Egitim ve Bilim Alaninda Gelismeler". Istanbul University Journal of the Faculty of Theology (in Turkish) (13): 1–21. 
Jump up 
^ Wiegand, Wayne A.; Davis, Donald G., eds. (1994). Encyclopedia of Library History. Routledge. p. 462. 
Jump up 
^ Özelli, The Evolution of the Formal Educational System and Its Relation to Economic Growth Policies in the First Turkish Republic, 77–92 
Jump up 
^ Landau, Atatürk and the Modernization of Turkey, 191. 
Jump up 
^ Kapluhan, Erol (2011), Türkiye Cumhuriyeti'nde Atatürk Dönemi Egitim Politikalari (1923–1938) ve Cografya Egitimi (PhD thesis) (in Turkish), Marmara University, pp. 203–5 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 536 
Jump up 
^ Inan, Atatürk Hakkinda Hatiralar ve Belgeler, 260 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b "About Us". Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 1 February 2008. 
Jump up 
^ Saikal, Democratization in the Middle East: Experiences, Struggles, Challenges, 95 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Geoffrey L. Lewis (1999), The Turkish Language Reform: A Catastrophic Success, Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-823856-8-page 66 
Jump up 
^ "Turks Teach New Theories". The New York Times. Istanbul. 9 February 1936. 
Jump up 
^ Laut (2002) 
Jump up 
^ "Gazi, önerilen 14. soyadini kabul etmis!". Habertürk. Retrieved December 18, 2017. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Cleveland, A History of the Modern Middle East, 181 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Michael Radu, (2003), "Dangerous Neighborhood: Contemporary Issues in Turkey's Foreign Relations", page 125, ISBN 978-0-7658-0166-1 
Jump up 
^ S. M. Zwemer: Translations of the Koran, The Moslem World, 1915 
Jump up 
^ Wilson, M. Brett. "The First Translations of the Qur'an in Modern Turkey (1924–1938)". International Journal of Middle East Studies. 41 (3): 419–435. doi:10.1017/s0020743809091132. 
Jump up 
^ Elmalili Hamdi Yazir, (1935), "Hak dini Kur'an dili: Yeni mealli Türkçe tefsir" 9 volumes, printed in Istanbul 
Jump up 
^ Paydak, Selda (January 2000). "Interview with Semiha Berksoy". Representation of the European Commission to Turkey. Archived from the original on 18 April 2003. Retrieved 11 February 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Omur, Modernity and Islam: Experiences of Turkish Women 
Jump up 
^ Atatürk, Vatandas Için Medeni Bilgiler 
Jump up 
^ Inan, Medeni bilgiler ve M. Kemal Atatürk'ün el yazilari 
Jump up 
^ "commonslibraryblog.com". commonslibraryblog.com (in Slovenian). November 18, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2018. 
Jump up 
^ Findley, Carter Vaughn (2010). Turkey, Islam, nationalism, and modernity : a history, 1789–2007. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-15260-9.[page needed] 
Jump up 
^ Republic Of Turkey Ministry Of National Education. "Turkish National Education System". T.C. Government. 
Jump up 
^ Ayhan Aktar, "Cumhuriyet'in Ðlk Yillarinda Uygulanan 'Türklestirme' Politikalari," in Varlik Vergisi ve 'Türklestirme' Politikalari,2nd ed. (Istanbul: Iletisim, 2000), 101. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Ertürk, Nergis. Grammatology and literary modernity in Turkey. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-974668-2. 
Jump up 
^ editor, Sibel Bozdogan, Gülru Necipoglu, editors ; Julia Bailey, managing (2007). Muqarnas : an annual on the visual culture of the Islamic world. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 9789004163201. 
Jump up 
^ Aslan, Senem (April 2007). ""Citizen, Speak Turkish!": A Nation in the Making". Nationalism and Ethnic Politics. Routledge, part of the Taylor & Francis Group. 13 (2): 245–272. doi:10.1080/13537110701293500. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Suny, edited by Ronald Grigor; Goçek,, Fatma Müge; Naimark, Norman M. A question of genocide : Armenians and Turks at the end of the Ottoman Empire. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-539374-3. 
Jump up 
^ Bali, Rifat N. (1999). Cumhuriyet yillarinda Türkiye Yahudileri bir türklestirme serüveni ; (1923 - 1945) (in Turkish) (7 ed.). Istanbul: Iletisim. pp. 137–147. ISBN 9789754707632. 
Jump up 
^ Ince, Basak (2012-06-15). Citizenship and identity in Turkey : from Atatürk's republic to the present day. London: I.B. Tauris. p. 61. ISBN 9781780760261. 
Jump up 
^ Vryonis, Speros (2005). The Mechanism of Catastrophe: The Turkish Pogrom of September 6–7, 1955, and the Destruction of the Greek Community of Istanbul. New York: Greekworks.com, Inc. ISBN 0-9747660-3-8. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Ince, Basak. Citizenship and identity in Turkey : from Atatürk's republic to the present day. London: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-78076-026-1. 
Jump up 
^ Aslan, Senem. "Incoherent State: The Controversy over Kurdish Naming in Turkey". European Journal of Turkish Studies. the Surname Law was meant to foster a sense of Turkishness within society and prohibited surnames that were related to foreign ethnicities and nations 
Jump up 
^ Ekmekcioglu, Lerna (2010). Improvising Turkishness: Being Armenian in post-Ottoman Istanbul (1918–1933). Ann Arbor. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-124-04442-2. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Nisanyan, Sevan (2010). Adini unutan ülke: Türkiye'de adi degistirilen yerler sözlügü (in Turkish) (1. basim. ed.). Istanbul: Everest Yayinlari. ISBN 978-975-289-730-4. 
Jump up 
^ Halis, Mujgan (30 July 2011). "Norsin'den Potamya'ya hayali cografyalarimiz". Sabah (in Turkish). 
Jump up 
^ Sahakyan, Lusine (2010). Turkification of the Toponyms in the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Turkey (PDF). Montreal: Arod Books. ISBN 978-0-9699879-7-0. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Simonian, edited by Hovann H. (2007). The Hemshin: history, society and identity in the highlands of northeast Turkey (PDF) (Repr. ed.). London: Routledge. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-7007-0656-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2013. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Jongerden, Joost (2007). The settlement issue in Turkey and the Kurds : an analysis of spatial policies, modernity and war ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill. p. 354. ISBN 978-90-04-15557-2. 
Jump up 
^ Korkut, Tolga (14 May 2009). "Names of 12,211 Villages Were Changed in Turkey". Bianet. 
Jump up 
^ Cagatay, Soner 2002 'Kemalist donemde goc ve iskan politikalari: Turk kimligi uzerine bir calisma (Policies of migration and settlement in the Kemalist era: a study on Turkish identity), Toplum ve Bilim, no. 93, pp. 218-41. 
Jump up 
^ Jongerden, Joost (2007). The settlement issue in Turkey and the Kurds : an analysis of spatial policies, modernity and war ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill. ISBN 9789004155572.[page needed] 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Mango, Atatürk, 526 
Jump up 
^ Hamza Eroglu. "Peace at home and peace in the world" (in Turkish). Retrieved 1 January 2008. "Yurtta Sulh" herseyden önce ülkede, o insanin, insanca yasamasini, insanlik tiynetinin gereginin taninmasini ifade eder". 
Jump up 
^ Enver Ziya Karal. Atatürk'ten Düsünceler (in Turkish). p. 123. Haricî siyaset bir heyet-i içtimaiyenin tesekkülü dahilisi ile siki surette alâkadardir. Çünkü tesekkül-ü dahiliyeye istinat etmeyen haricî siyasetler daima mahkûm kalirlar. Bir heyet-i içtimaiyenin tesekkül-ü dahilisi ne kadar kuvvetli olursa, siyaset-i hariciyesi de o nisbette kavi ve rasin olur. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Peter Sluglett, "The Primacy of Oil in Britain's Iraq Policy", in the book "Britain in Iraq: 1914–1932" London: Ithaca Press, 1976, pp. 103–116 
Jump up 
^ Can Dundar. "Atatürk yasasaydi" (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 20 November 2007. Retrieved 1 January 2008. ... Ata'nin öncelikli dis politika sorununun Musul oldugunu söylüyor. Musul'u birakmama konusunda aktif bir politika izlenmesinden yana oldugunu belirtiyor... 
Jump up 
^ Harold Courtenay Armstrong Gray Wolf, Mustafa Kemal: An Intimate Study of a Dictator. page 225 
Jump up 
^ Olson, Robert W. (1989) The Emergence of Kurdish Nationalism and the Sheikh Said Rebellion, 1880–1925, p.45 
Jump up 
^ Kinross, 401 
Jump up 
^ ASD: Speeches and statements by Atatürk, volume I pages 361–363 published by Atatürk Culture, language and history Higher Institute, Ankara 1989 
Jump up 
^ Andrew Mango, Atatürk and the Kurds, Middle Eastern Studies, Vol.35, No.4, 1999, 20 
Jump up 
^ ????????????? ????? (the Soviet Foreign Minisrty's magazine). Moscow, 1963, ? 11, pp. 147–148. The first publication of Kemal's letter to Lenin in excerpts, in Russian. 
Jump up 
^ ????????????? ?????. Moscow, 1963, ? 11, p. 148. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Yilmaz Altug, Foreign Policy of Atatürk, Atatürk arastirma merkezi dergisi, Vol VI, No 16, November 1989 
Jump up 
^ Yilmaz Altug, Türk Devrim Tarihi Dersim, 1919–1938, 1980 s. p. 136. 
Jump up 
^ Patrick Kinross. Atatürk: a biography of Mustafa Kemal, father of modern Turkey. New York, 1965, p. 464. 
Jump up 
^ ???, 1st edition, Moscow, Vol. 55, 1947, column 374. 
Jump up 
^ ???, 1st edition, Moscow, Vol. 55, 1947, column 377. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b "Oh, What Happiness!". Time Magazine. 6 November 1933. pp. 37–39. Retrieved 7 August 2007. 
Jump up 
^ ???, 2nd edition, Moscow, Vol. 20, 1953, p. 504. 
Jump up 
^ Karamanlis, 1995, p. 95-97 
Jump up 
^ Sosyal, Ismail, 1983, "Turkey's Diplomatic treaties", TTK, Ankara page 29 
Jump up 
^ Clogg, Richard (2002). A Concise History of Greece. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-00479-9. p. 107 
Jump up 
^ Jentleson, Bruce W.; Paterson, Thomas G. (1997). The American Journal of International Law. Oxford University Press. p. 24. ISBN 0-19-511055-2. 
Jump up 
^ Narli, Nilüfer (1993): "Turco-Iranian Relations from the Islamic Revolution to Gulf War and Beyond: Co-operation or Competition in the Muslim World". CEMOTI. (15): 265–295 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c Gokhan Cetinsaya "Essential friends and natural enemies: the historical roots of Turkish-Iranian relations." Middle East Review of International Affairs Volume 7, No. 3 – September 2003 
Jump up 
^ Rajaee, Farhang, Islamic Values and World View: Farhang Khomeyni on Man, the State and International Politics, Volume XIII Archived 26 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine. (PDF), University Press of America. ISBN 0-8191-3578-X 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 510 
Jump up 
^ Sosyal, Ismail, 1983, "Turkey's Diplomatic treaties", TTK, Ankara page 493 
Jump up 
^ Yilmaz Altuð, "Atatürk'ün Dis Politikasý," B.Ü. Uluslararasi Atatürk Konferansý Tebligleri, 10–11 November 1980, Vol. II, Istanbul 1981, p. 486. 
Jump up 
^ Þevket Süreyya Aydemir, Tek Adam, Vol. 3, Ýstanbul 1988, p. 331. 
Jump up 
^ Atatürk'ün Milli Dýþ Politikasý, Vol. 2, p. 355 
Jump up 
^ Huntington, Political Order in Changing Societies, 347–357 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Mango, Atatürk, 470 
Jump up 
^ Shaw, History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, 232–233. 
Jump up 
^ Aysu, Abdullah (29 January 2003). "Tütün, Içki ve Tekel" (in Turkish). BIA Haber Merkezi. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. Retrieved 10 October 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Ibrahim Kaya, Social Theory and Later Modernities, page 90 
Jump up 
^ Mango, Atatürk, 478 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c d Barlas, Etatism and Diplomacy in Turkey: Economic and Foreign Policy Strategies in an Uncertain World, 1929–1939 
Jump up 
^ Emrence, Turkey in economic crisis (1927–1930): a panoramic vision. Journal Middle Eastern Studies 
Jump up 
^ "Skylife". Retrieved 26 November 2007. 
Jump up 
^ "History of Turkish Aeronautical Association". Archived from the original on 19 December 2007. Retrieved 26 November 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Dilek Barlas, Etatism and Diplomacy in Turkey: Economic and Foreign Policy Strategies p. 61 
Jump up 
^ Webster, The Turkey of Atatürk: Social Process in the Turkish Reformation, 260 
Jump up 
^ Dogan, Formation of factory settlements within Turkish industrialization and modernization in 1930s: Nazilli printing factory 
Jump up 
^ Republic of Turkey, Ministry of Culture and Tourism. "Aydin – Historical Ruins". T.C. Government. Retrieved 2007. Nazilli cotton print factory was established over an area of 65.000 m2 on the Nazilli Bozdogan highway. It is the "first Turkish cotton print factory" the foundation of which was laid on 25 August 1935 and which was opened by Atatürk with great ceremony. Check date values in: |accessdate= (help) 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b "Nuri Demirag Aircraft Factory". Nuridemirag.com. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ Stone, Norman "Talking Turkey". National Interest, Fall2000, Issue 61. 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b Eastham, The Turkish Development Plan: The First Five Years, 132–136 
Jump up 
^ Atatürk: Eine Biographie, Klaus Kreiser, C.H.Beck, 2011, ISBN 3406619789, p. 80, (Ger.) 
Jump up 
^ "Balkan Is Not Dead". IMDb. 9 August 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ "Atatürk'ün Özel Hayati". Atatürk. 2008. Archived from the original on 31 December 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ Bozdag, Ismet (2005). Latife ve Fikriye Iki Ask Arasinda Atatürk. Istanbul: Truva Yayinlari. 
Jump up 
^ Turgut, Pelin (1 July 2006). "Turkey in the 21st century: The Legacy Of Mrs Ataturk". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 2006-07-18. Retrieved 29 September 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Akhtar, Salman (2008). The Crescent and the Couch: Cross-Currents Between Islam and Psychoanalysis. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 68. ISBN 0-7657-0574-5. 
Jump up 
^ Sabiha Gokcen biography, Hargrave Pioneers of Aviation 
Jump up 
^ Atatürk'ün Hayati (Atatürk's Life). Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey) (in Turkish). 
Jump up 
^ "The Burial of Atatürk". Time Magazine. 23 November 1953. pp. 37–39. Retrieved 7 August 2007. 
Jump up 
^ Navaro-Yashin, Yael (2002). Faces of the State: Secularism and Public Life in Turkey. Princeton University Press. pp. 196–99. ISBN 0-691-08845-4. 
Jump up 
^ Morrison, Terry; Conaway, Wayne A. (1994). Kiss, Bow, Or Shake Hands: How to Do Business in Sixty Countries. Adams Media. p. 392. ISBN 1-55850-444-3. 
Jump up 
^ Yonah, Alexander (2007). Turkey: Terrorism, Civil Rights, and the European Union. Routledge. p. 137. ISBN 0-415-44163-3. 
Jump up 
^ "Turkish Telecommunications Presidency: Internet Hotline". Ihbarweb.org.tr. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ Toksabay, Ece. "Turkey reinstates YouTube ban". Reuters. Retrieved 10 November 2012. 
Jump up 
^ "Google defies Turkey, reinstates Atatürk insult videos". Theregister.co.uk. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
Jump up 
^ Time to break out of legislative straitjacket that is stifling media freedom, Reporters Sans Frontières, 1 December 2010 
^ 
Jump up to: 
a b c M. Sükrü Hanioglu (9 May 2011). Atatürk: An Intellectual Biography. Princeton University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-1-4008-3817-2. Retrieved 5 June 2013. 
References
Prints
Ahmad, Feroz (1993). The Making of Modern Turkey. London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-07835-1.
Armstrong, Harold Courtenay (1972). Grey Wolf, Mustafa Kemal: An Intimate Study of a Dictator. Freeport, NY: Books for Libraries Press. ISBN 978-0-8369-6962-7.
Atillasoy, Yüksel (2002). Atatürk: First President and Founder of the Turkish Republic. Woodside, NY: Woodside House. ISBN 978-0-9712353-4-2.
Barber, Noel (1988). Lords of the Golden Horn. London: Arrow. ISBN 978-0-09-953950-6.
Barlas, Dilek (1998). Statism and Diplomacy in Turkey: Economic and Foreign Policy Strategies in an Uncertain World, 1929–1939. New York: Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-10855-4.
Cleveland, William L (2004). A History of the Modern Middle East. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-4048-7.
Dogan, Çagatay Emre (2003). Formation of Factory Settlements Within Turkish Industrialization and Modernization in 1930s: Nazilli Printing Factory (in Turkish). Ankara: Middle East Technical University. OCLC 54431696.
Hanioglu, M. Sükrü (2011). Atatürk: An Intellectual Biography. New Jersey and Woodstock (Oxfordshire): Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15109-0.
Huntington, Samuel P. (2006). Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven, Conn.; London: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11620-5.
Igdemir, Ulug; Mango, Andrew (translation) (1963). Atatürk. Ankara: Turkish National Commission for UNESCO. pp. 165–170. OCLC 75604149.
Inan, Ayse Afet (2007). Atatürk Hakkinda Hatiralar ve Belgeler (in Turkish). Istanbul: Türkiye Is Bankasi Kültür Yayinlari. ISBN 978-9944-88-140-1.
Inan, Ayse Afet; Sevim, Ali; Süslü, Azmi; Tural, M Akif (1998). Medeni bilgiler ve M. Kemal Atatürk'ün el Yazilari (in Turkish). Ankara: AKDTYK Atatürk Arastirma Merkezi. ISBN 978-975-16-1276-2.
Kinross, Patrick (2003). Atatürk: The Rebirth of a Nation. London: Phoenix Press. ISBN 978-1-84212-599-1. OCLC 55516821.
Kinross, Patrick (1979). The Ottoman Centuries: The Rise and Fall of the Turkish Empire. New York: Morrow. ISBN 978-0-688-08093-8.
Landau, Jacob M (1983). Atatürk and the Modernization of Turkey. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-86531-986-8.
Lengyel, Emil (1962). They Called Him Atatürk. New York: The John Day Co. OCLC 1337444.
Mango, Andrew (2002) [1999]. Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey (Paperback ed.). Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, Peter Mayer Publishers, Inc. ISBN 1-58567-334-X.
Mango, Andrew (2004). Atatürk. London: John Murray. ISBN 978-0-7195-6592-2.
Saikal, Amin; Schnabel, Albrecht (2003). Democratization in the Middle East: Experiences, Struggles, Challenges. Tokyo: United Nations University Press. ISBN 978-92-808-1085-1.
Shaw, Stanford Jay; Shaw, Ezel Kural (1976–1977). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-21280-9.
Spangnolo, John (1992). The Modern Middle East in Historical Perspective: Essays in Honour of Albert Hourani. Oxford: Middle East Centre, St. Antony's College. ISBN 978-0-86372-164-9. OCLC 80503960.
Tunçay, Mete (1972). Mesaî : Halk Sûrâlar Firkasi Programi, 1920 (in Turkish). Ankara: Ankara Üniversitesi Siyasal Bilgiler Fakültesi. OCLC 1926301.
Tüfekçi, Gürbüz D (1981). Universality of Atatürk's Philosophy. Ankara: Pan Matbaacilik. OCLC 54074541.
Yapp, Malcolm (1987). The Making of the Modern Near East, 1792–1923. London ; New York: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-49380-3.
Webster, Donald Everett (1973). The Turkey of Atatürk; Social Process in the Turkish Reformation. New York: AMS Press. ISBN 978-0-404-56333-2.
Zürcher, Erik Jan (2004). Turkey: A Modern History. London; New York: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-85043-399-6.
Journals
Eastham, J. K. (March 1964). "The Turkish Development Plan: The First Five Years". The Economic Journal. New York: Macmillan. 74 (298): 132–136. doi:10.2307/2228117. ISSN 0013-0133. JSTOR 2228117.
Emrence, Cem (2003). "Turkey in Economic Crisis (1927–1930): A Panoramic Vision". Middle Eastern Studies. London: F. Cass. 39 (4): 67–80. doi:10.1080/00263200412331301787. ISSN 0026-3206.
Omur, Asli (December 2002). "Modernity and Islam: Experiences of Turkish Women". Turkish Times. 13 (312). ISSN 1043-0164. Retrieved 10 October 2007.
Özelli, M. Tunç (January 1974). "The Evolution of the Formal Educational System and its Relation to Economic Growth Policies in the First Turkish Republic". International Journal of Middle East Studies. London: Cambridge University Press. 5 (1): 77–92. doi:10.1017/s0020743800032803. ISSN 0020-7438. JSTOR 162345.
Stone, Norman (2000). "Talking Turkey". The National Interest. New York: National Affairs, Inc. 61: 66. ISSN 0884-9382.
Volkan, Vamik D. (1981). "Immortal Atatürk – Narcissism and Creativity in a Revolutionary Leader". Psychoanalytic Study of Society. New York: Psychohistory Press. 9: 221–255. ISSN 0079-7294. OCLC 60448681.
Wolf-Gazo, Ernest (1996). "John Dewey in Turkey: An Educational Mission". Journal of American Studies of Turkey. Ankara, Turkey: American Studies Association of Turkey. 3: 15–42. ISSN 1300-6606. Archived from the original on 27 March 2009.
"Mustafa Kemal Atatürk". TP Editors. pp. 7–8. Retrieved 29 April 2008.
"The Burial of Atatürk". Time Magazine. 23 November 1953. pp. 37–39. Retrieved 7 August 2007.
External links
Find more about
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
at Wikipedia's sister projects 
Definitions from Wiktionary 
Media from Wikimedia Commons 
News from Wikinews 
Quotations from Wikiquote 
Texts from Wikisource 
Textbooks from Wikibooks 
Learning resources from Wikiversity 
Incredible Turk: Documentary on Mustafa Kemal Atatürk on YouTube
Memorial room in Bitola (Monastir)
The short film Incredible Turk (1958) is available for free download at the Internet Archive
Newspaper clippings about Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in the 20th Century Press Archives of the German National Library of Economics (ZBW)
Military offices 
Preceded by
Ahmet Izzet Furgaç 
Commander of the Second Army
March – July 1917 
Succeeded by
Fevzi Çakmak 
Preceded by
Unknown 
Commander of the Seventh Army
July – October 1917 
Succeeded by
Fevzi Çakmak 
Preceded by
Fevzi Çakmak 
Commander of the Seventh Army
August – September 1918 
Formation destroyed 
Preceded by
Otto Liman von Sanders 
Commander of Thunder Army Group
Residual elements
October – November 1918 
Formation dissolved 
Political offices 
New title
State founded
Prime Minister of Turkey
25 April 1920 – 24 January 1921 
Succeeded by
Fevzi Çakmak 
New title
State founded
Speaker of the Parliament of Turkey
24 April 1920 – 29 October 1923 
Succeeded by
Ali Fethi Okyar 
New title
State founded
President of Turkey
29 October 1923 – 10 November 1938 
Succeeded by
Ismet Inönü 
Party political offices 
New title
State founded
Leader of the Republican People's Party
9 September 1923 – 10 November 1938 
Succeeded by
Ismet Inönü 
show
vte
Presidents of Turkey (List - By age)
show
vte
 Prime Minister of Turkey
show
vte
Speakers of the Parliament of the Republic of Turkey
show
vte
Leaders of the Republican People's Party
show
vte
Turkish nationalism
show
vte
Turkey articles
show
vte
Party leaders in Turkey
Authority control 
WorldCat IdentitiesBIBSYS: 90197069BNE: XX882889BNF: cb12055367s (data)GND: 118650793ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 6864LCCN: n80044800LNB: 000129362MusicBrainz: 86eae395-572b-4d81-84b7-4aaa957b206eNDL: 00620292NKC: jo20010084749NLA: 35009723RSL: 000082905SELIBR: 175902SNAC: w6x06bk7SUDOC: 028790952VIAF: 87758727
Categories: Mustafa Kemal Atatürk1881 births1938 deathsCommittee of Union and Progress politiciansCritics of religionsDeaths from cirrhosisDeputies of AnkaraDolmabahçe PalaceField marshals of TurkeyLeaders of the Republican People's Party (Turkey)Légion d'honneur recipientsMacedonian TurksMembers of the Special Organization of the Ottoman EmpireMonastir Military High School alumniOttoman generalsOttoman Military Academy alumniOttoman Military College alumniOttoman military personnel of the Balkan WarsOttoman military personnel of the Italo-Turkish WarOttoman military personnel of World War IOttoman ThessalonicaPan-TurkistsPashasPeople from Salonica VilayetPeople from ThessalonikiPeople of the Dersim rebellionPresidents of TurkeyPrime Ministers of TurkeyRecipients of the Imtiyaz MedalRecipients of the Iron Cross (1914), 1st classRecipients of the Liakat MedalRecipients of the Medal of Independence with Red-Green Ribbon (Turkey)Recipients of the Order of Saint Alexander (Bulgaria)Recipients of the Order of the Medjidie, 1st classRepublicanism in TurkeySecularism in TurkeySpeakers of the Parliament of TurkeyTurkish military personnel of the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)Turkish nationalistsTurkish revolutionariesTurkish secularistsTurks of the Ottoman EmpireWitnesses of the Armenian Genocide


 




